1. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2007 Oct 11:924.

PDA for health professionals: can you deal with that?

da Costa TM(1), Pinto VC, Mauad RF, Afonso DL, da Silva FA, Alves D, Schor P, 
Pisa IT.

Author information:
(1)Health Informatics Department, Federal University of Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), 
Brazil.

Personal digital assistants (PDAs) are being increasingly used on the health 
field, however, there are not many papers guiding a PDA-software development 
process concerning its usability in health field. This paper presents our 
experience dealing with PDAs regarding some elements of usability. We have shown 
that if simple yet extremely important points are to be observed before and 
during the development process, usability on PDA software can be greatly 
improved.

PMID: 18694024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Int J Med Inform. 2001 Dec;64(2-3):111-27. doi: 10.1016/s1386-5056(01)00205-2.

Delivering the electronic healthcare record for the 21st century.

Grimson J(1).

Author information:
(1)Dublin Health Informatics Group, Centre for Health Informatics, O'Reilly 
Institute Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland. jane.grimson@tcd.ie

In spite of over four decades of research into Electronic Healthcare Record 
Systems, the penetration of records which incorporate more than simply basic 
information, into the working life of healthcare organisations is relatively 
small. This paper discusses some of the key impediments to progress including in 
particular, the lack of application of software engineering methodologies, the 
absence of usable standards, and the failure to acknowledge the impact of record 
systems on the healthcare system itself. However, Health Informatics researchers 
need to be preparing for the next generation of systems which will be triggered 
by the twin revolutions of the Internet and Genetic Medicine. This next 
generation of EHCR will be a longitudinal cradle-to-the-grave active record 
readily accessible and available via the Internet, and which will be linked to 
clinical protocols and guidelines to drive the delivery of healthcare to the 
individual citizen. Post-genomic research will unravel the link between genes, 
disease, treatment and the environment and this information will be used to 
promote health and individualise care. A number of key research issues are 
identified which need to be addressed in order to realise the delivery of the 
next generation of EHCR Systems.

DOI: 10.1016/s1386-5056(01)00205-2
PMID: 11734380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2011;2011:5339-42. doi: 
10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091321.

Using Participatory Design in a Health Information System.

Teixeira L(1), Saavedra V, Ferreira C, Santos BS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Economics, Management andIndustrial Engineering, and 
Governance, Competitiveness and PublicPolitics, and the Institute of Electronics 
and TelematicsEngineering of Aveiro, Aveiro University, Portugal. 
lteixeira@ua.pt

This article describes the experience of developing an interactive Health 
Information System (iHIS) currently under test in a hospital, which benefited 
from the practices of the User-Centred Design (UCD), in a Participatory Design 
(PD) approach. Techniques from the Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and/or 
Usability Engineering (UE), combined with traditional Software Engineering (SE), 
allowed an effective and usable solution from the user's point of view. The good 
results usually achieved with this approach were confirmed. Despite these good 
results, we deem that if there is not some control of the procedure by the 
project manager, it may be difficult to end the requirement analysis, since 
requirement reformulation is fostered.

DOI: 10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091321
PMID: 22255544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Yearb Med Inform. 2011;6:63-72.

Towards open collaborative health informatics - The Role of free/libre open 
source principles. Contribution of the IMIA Open Source Health Informatics 
Working Group.

Karopka T(1), Schmuhl H, Marcelo A, Molin JD, Wright G.

Author information:
(1)Stralsunder Str. 18, 18445 Prohn, Germany. TKaropka@gmail.com

OBJECTIVES: : To analyze the contribution of Free/Libre Open Source Software in 
health care (FLOSS-HC) and to give perspectives for future developments.
METHODS: The paper summarizes FLOSS-related trends in health care as anticipated 
by members of the IMIA Open Source Working Group. Data were obtained through 
literature review and personal experience and observations of the authors in the 
last two decades. A status quo is given by a frequency analysis of the database 
of Medfloss.org, one of the world's largest platforms dedicated to FLOSS-HC. The 
authors discuss current problems in the field of health care and finally give a 
prospective roadmap, a projection of the potential influences of FLOSS in health 
care.
RESULTS: FLOSS-HC already exists for more than 2 decades. Several projects have 
shown that FLOSS may produce highly competitive alternatives to proprietary 
solutions that are at least equivalent in usability and have a better total cost 
of ownership ratio. The Medfloss.org database currently lists 221 projects of 
diverse application types.
CONCLUSIONS: FLOSS principles hold a great potential for addressing several of 
the most critical problems in health care IT. The authors argue that an 
ecosystem perspective is relevant and that FLOSS principles are best suited to 
create health IT systems that are able to evolve over time as medical knowledge, 
technologies, insights, workflows etc. continuously change. All these factors 
that inherently influence the development of health IT systems are changing at 
an ever growing pace. Traditional models of software engineering are not able to 
follow these changes and provide up-to-date systems for an acceptable cost/value 
ratio. To allow FLOSS to positively influence Health IT in the future a 
"FLOSS-friendly" environment has to be provided. Policy makers should resolve 
uncertainties in the legal framework that disfavor FLOSS. Certification 
procedures should be specified in a way that they do not raise additional 
barriers for FLOSS.

PMID: 21938327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Comput Biol Med. 2002 May;32(3):141-9. doi: 10.1016/s0010-4825(02)00011-2.

Evaluation in the design of health information systems: application of 
approaches emerging from usability engineering.

Kushniruk A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Information Technology Division, 
York University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, Ont., Canada M3J 1P3. 
andrek@mathstat.yorku.ca

This paper examines the role of evaluation in the design of health care 
information systems. A framework is presented for considering evaluation in the 
context of software development processes, in particular, the systems 
development life cycle (SDLC). Variations on standard design methodologies are 
then discussed, including methods based on rapid development and continual 
evaluation of prototype systems. Usability testing is presented as a key method 
for conducting evaluations during iterative system development. The emergence of 
design methodologies, where evaluation is viewed as a central part of the 
development cycle is also discussed. Evaluation methodologies are then 
considered along a continuum, ranging from studies involving a high degree of 
experimental control to observational approaches. A full cycle approach to 
evaluation of health care systems is argued for, involving deployment of new 
methods across the SDLC. Implications for future work exploring the integration 
of design and evaluation processes in health informatics are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0010-4825(02)00011-2
PMID: 11922931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2011;164:293-7.

Use of qualitative methods across the software development lifecycle in health 
informatics.

Borycki EM(1), Househ M, Kushniruk AW, Kuziemsky C.

Author information:
(1)School of Health Information Science, University of Victoria, Victoria, 
British Columbia, Canada. emb@uvic.ca

In this paper the authors review and discuss four different qualitative 
approaches as they are used to evaluate health information systems: (1) grounded 
theory, (2) ethnography, (3) verbal protocol analysis/usability engineering and 
(4) action research. The authors describe the historical origins, current uses, 
strengths and weakness of the three qualitative methodologies that are 
frequently used in health informatics and they discuss an emerging approach: 
action research. More importantly, they identify how each of the approaches can 
be used across the SDLC to inform planning, analysis, design, implementation and 
support of health information systems.

PMID: 21335726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 6;13(11):e0206600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206600. 
eCollection 2018.

Telemonitoring system for patients with chronic kidney disease undergoing 
peritoneal dialysis: Usability assessment based on a case study.

Martínez García MA(1), Fernández Rosales MS(1), López Domínguez E(2), Hernández 
Velázquez Y(2), Domínguez Isidro S(2).

Author information:
(1)General Hospital of Zone No. 11,Instituto Méxicano del Seguro Social, Xalapa, 
Veracruz, Mexico.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Laboratorio Nacional de Informática Avanzada, 
Xalapa, Veracruz, México.

There are two million people with chronic kidney disease (CKD) worldwide. In 
Mexico, it is estimated that by 2025, there will be 212 thousand CKD cases. 
Among the renal replacement treatments, peritoneal dialysis (PD) exists either 
in the continuous ambulatory (CAPD) or automated (APD) mode, which requires 
continuous monitoring and strict control. Thus, several software systems have 
been proposed to perform reliable remote monitoring of patients using PD but 
also to achieve the goal with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction; i.e., 
in software engineering, this is called usability. However, few studies have 
addressed usability issues using case studies with patients and medical staff in 
real domains. In this paper, we present a usability assessment of a 
telemonitoring system for patients with CKD on peritoneal dialysis treatment 
through a case study with patients and medical staff of the Mexican Institute of 
Social Security (IMSS). The usability evaluation was carried out through the 
application of two satisfaction instruments. These instruments evaluated 
multiple usability criteria, such as navigability, interactivity, motivation, 
satisfaction, and applicability. The results obtained from the usability 
evaluation show that, on average, the services offered by the system have 91.3% 
acceptance by users (patient-doctors), with the APD and CAPD exchange data 
registration services having the highest acceptance for patients, with a 
positive perception of 94.5% and 92.3%, respectively. Meanwhile, for the doctors 
and nurses, the alarm reception for patients in a risk situation was highest 
with 95% acceptance. Based on the obtained results, the evaluated telemonitoring 
system holds wide acceptance, satisfaction, and applicability from patients' and 
doctors' perspectives. It is also noted that the evaluated system considers and 
satisfies the requirements and suitable parameters that should be monitored in 
PD treatment according to studies presented in the literature.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206600
PMCID: PMC6219778
PMID: 30399164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


8. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2019 Apr 11;7(4):e12551. doi: 10.2196/12551.

A Mobile Phone App for Bedside Nursing Care: Design and Development Using an 
Adapted Software Development Life Cycle Model.

Ehrler F(1), Lovis C(1)(2), Blondon K(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Information Sciences, University Hospitals of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Medical Directorate, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Nurses are increasingly spending time on computers, and providing 
them with a tailored tool to access clinical information and perform 
documentation at the bedside could help to improve their efficiency. Designing 
an app to support nurses' work at the bedside is a challenging task, given the 
complexity of the care process.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to present the design, development, and testing of a 
smartphone app for nurses guided by an adapted software development life cycle 
model that takes into consideration the complexity and constraints of a health 
care setting.
METHODS: The model drives us through an iterative development process 
intersected by 3 stages of formative evaluation of growing ecological validity.
RESULTS: The initial requirements identification stage included 11 participants 
who helped us select the most important functionalities to integrate into the 
tool. Starting with a usability evaluation allowed for the identification of 
design issues that could have caused misuse. Then, making on-site evaluations 
under the supervision of an investigator helped to understand the adequacy of 
the tool with limited risks. Finally, the on-site evaluation allowed us to 
validate the acceptance of the app by caregivers.
CONCLUSIONS: The interpretation of the collected evaluation confirms the 
necessary involvement of end users early in the process to help address the 
heterogeneity of the nursing workflow processes in the different wards. We also 
highlight the delicate balance between high-security measures to protect access 
to patient data and maintaining ease of access for efficiency and usability. 
Although a close collaboration with clinicians throughout the entire project 
facilitated the development of a tailored solution, it was also important to 
involve all stakeholders, in particular, the information technology (IT) 
security officers.

©Frederic Ehrler, Christian Lovis, Katherine Blondon. Originally published in 
JMIR Mhealth and Uhealth (http://mhealth.jmir.org), 11.04.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/12551
PMCID: PMC6482397
PMID: 30973339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


9. Int J Med Inform. 2018 Apr;112:114-122. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.01.016. 
Epub 2018 Jan 31.

Experiences of building a medical data acquisition system based on two-level 
modeling.

Li B(1), Li J(2), Lan X(3), An Y(3), Gao W(3), Jiang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Information Security and Big Data Research Institute, Central South 
University, Changsha, China. Electronic address: libeiwu@126.com.
(2)Information Security and Big Data Research Institute, Central South 
University, Changsha, China. Electronic address: jobs_ljb@foxmail.com.
(3)Information Security and Big Data Research Institute, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Compared to traditional software development strategies, 
the two-level modeling approach is more flexible and applicable to build an 
information system in the medical domain. However, the standards of two-level 
modeling such as openEHR appear complex to medical professionals. This study 
aims to investigate, implement, and improve the two-level modeling approach, and 
discusses the experience of building a unified data acquisition system for four 
affiliated university hospitals based on this approach.
METHOD: After the investigation, we simplified the approach of archetype 
modeling and developed a medical data acquisition system where medical experts 
can define the metadata for their own specialties by using a visual easy-to-use 
tool.
RESULT: The medical data acquisition system for multiple centers, clinical 
specialties, and diseases has been developed, and integrates the functions of 
metadata modeling, form design, and data acquisition. To date, 93,353 data items 
and 6,017 categories for 285 specific diseases have been created by medical 
experts, and over 25,000 patients' information has been collected.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: OpenEHR is an advanced two-level modeling method for 
medical data, but its idea to separate domain knowledge and technical concern is 
not easy to realize. Moreover, it is difficult to reach an agreement on 
archetype definition. Therefore, we adopted simpler metadata modeling, and 
employed What-You-See-Is-What-You-Get (WYSIWYG) tools to further improve the 
usability of the system. Compared with the archetype definition, our approach 
lowers the difficulty. Nevertheless, to build such a system, every participant 
should have some knowledge in both medicine and information technology domains, 
as these interdisciplinary talents are necessary.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.01.016
PMID: 29500008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PM R. 2017 May;9(5S):S19-S25. doi: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2017.02.011.

IT Is From Mars and Physicians From Venus: Bridging the Gap.

Huang ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Shirley Ryan AbilityLab, 355 E. Erie St, Chicago, 
IL 60611(∗). Electronic address: mhuang@sralab.org.

With increasing adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) and legislative 
mandates for its use within the United States, collaboration between physicians 
and information technology (IT) staff is essential. Current challenges that 
physicians face include addressing EHR usability, system performance, adequate 
training, issue resolution, regulatory compliance, and lack of awareness of IT 
roles. These challenges lead to gaps in communication between clinicians and IT 
staff. Strategies to improve collaboration between physicians and IT staff 
include increasing physician involvement with health information technology 
software development, involvement with legislative regulations and standards, IT 
project implementation, as well as system stabilization and optimization. Other 
key strategies to improve collaboration are also addressed, including proper 
leadership support, proper training, and proper issue triage. Improved 
collaboration can result in more effective EHR design and implementation which 
in turn can enhance the end user experience and patient care.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2017.02.011
PMID: 28527499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2019 Jul 19;7(7):e13503. doi: 10.2196/13503.

A Smart and Multifaceted Mobile Health System for Delivering Evidence-Based 
Secondary Prevention of Stroke in Rural China: Design, Development, and 
Feasibility Study.

Wu N(#)(1), Gong E(#)(2), Wang B(1), Gu W(2), Ding N(1), Zhang Z(1), Chen M(1), 
Yan LL(2), Oldenburg B(3), Xu LQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence for mHealth and Smart Healthcare, China Mobile Research 
Institute, China Mobile Communications Corporation, Beijing, China.
(2)Global Health Research Center, Duke Kunshan University, Kunshan, China.
(3)School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Mobile health (mHealth) technologies hold great promise in improving 
the delivery of high-quality health care services. Yet, there has been little 
research so far applying mHealth technologies in the context of delivering 
stroke care in resource-limited rural regions.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to introduce the design and development of an 
mHealth system targeting primary health care providers and to ascertain its 
feasibility in supporting the delivery of a System-Integrated techNology-Enabled 
Model of cAre (SINEMA) service for strengthening secondary prevention of stroke 
in rural China.
METHODS: The SINEMA mHealth system was designed by a multidisciplinary team 
comprising public health researchers, neurologists, and information and 
communication technology experts. The iterative co-design and development of the 
mHealth system involved the following 5 steps: (1) assessing the needs of 
relevant end users through in-depth interviews of stakeholders, (2) designing 
the functional modules and evidence-based care content, (3) designing and 
building the system and user interface, (4) improving and enhancing the system 
through a 3-month pilot test in 4 villages, and (5) finalizing the system and 
deploying it in field trial, and finally, evaluating its feasibility through a 
survey of the dominant user group.
RESULTS: From the in-depth interviews of 49 relevant stakeholders, we found that 
village doctors had limited capacity in caring for village-dwelling stroke 
patients in rural areas. Primary health care workers demonstrated real needs in 
receiving appropriate training and support from the mHealth system as well as 
great interests in using the mHealth technologies and tools. Using these 
findings, we designed a multifaceted mHealth system with 7 functional modules by 
following the iterative user-centered design and software development approach. 
The mHealth system, aimed at 3 different types of users (village doctors, town 
physicians, and county managers), was developed and utilized in a 
cluster-randomized controlled trial by 25 village doctors in a resource-limited 
county in rural China to manage 637 stroke patients between July 2017 and July 
2018. In the end, a survey on the usability and functions of the mHealth system 
among village doctors (the dominant group of users, response rate=96%, 24/25) 
revealed that most of them were satisfied with the essential functions provided 
(71%) and were keen to continue using it (92%) after the study.
CONCLUSIONS: The mHealth system was feasible for assisting primary health care 
providers in rural China in delivering the SINEMA service on the secondary 
prevention of stroke. Further research and initiatives in scaling up the SINEMA 
approach and this mHealth system to other resource-limited regions in China and 
beyond will likely enhance the quality and accessibility of essential secondary 
prevention among stroke patients.
CLINICALTRIAL: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03185858; 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03185858.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): 
RR2-10.1016/j.ahj.2018.08.015.

©Na Wu, Enying Gong, Bo Wang, Wanbing Gu, Nan Ding, Zhuoran Zhang, Mengyao Chen, 
Lijing L Yan, Brian Oldenburg, Li-Qun Xu. Originally published in JMIR Mhealth 
and Uhealth (http://mhealth.jmir.org), 19.07.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/13503
PMCID: PMC6676792
PMID: 31325288

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


12. Mil Med. 2009 May;174(5 Suppl):27-34. doi: 10.7205/milmed-d-03-9608.

Software architecture and engineering for patient records: current and future.

Weng C(1), Levine BA, Mun SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, 622 W 168 Street, VC-5, New York, NY 10032, USA.

During the "The National Forum on the Future of the Defense Health Information 
System," a track focusing on "Systems Architecture and Software Engineering" 
included eight presenters. These presenters identified three key areas of 
interest in this field, which include the need for open enterprise architecture 
and a federated database design, net centrality based on service-oriented 
architecture, and the need for focus on software usability and reusability. The 
eight panelists provided recommendations related to the suitability of 
service-oriented architecture and the enabling technologies of grid computing 
and Web 2.0 for building health services research centers and federated data 
warehouses to facilitate large-scale collaborative health care and research. 
Finally, they discussed the need to leverage industry best practices for 
software engineering to facilitate rapid software development, testing, and 
deployment.

DOI: 10.7205/milmed-d-03-9608
PMID: 19562959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. JMIR Form Res. 2018 Sep 6;2(2):e19. doi: 10.2196/formative.9954.

A Stress Management App Intervention for Cancer Survivors: Design, Development, 
and Usability Testing.

Børøsund E(1), Mirkovic J(1), Clark MM(2), Ehlers SL(2), Andrykowski MA(3), 
Bergland A(1), Westeng M(1), Solberg Nes L(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Shared Decision Making and Collaborative Care Research, Division 
of Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, College of Medicine and Science, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(3)Department of Behavioral Science, College of Medicine, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States.
(4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Distress is prevalent in cancer survivors. Stress management 
interventions can reduce distress and improve quality of life for cancer 
patients, but many people with cancer are unfortunately not offered or able to 
attend such in-person stress management interventions.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to develop an evidence-based stress 
management intervention for patients living with cancer that can be delivered 
electronically with wide reach and dissemination. This paper describes the 
design and development process of a technology-based stress management 
intervention for cancer survivors, including the exploration phase, intervention 
content development, iterative software development (including design, 
development, and formative evaluation of low- and high-level prototypes), and 
security and privacy considerations.
METHODS: Design and development processes were iterative and performed in close 
collaboration with key stakeholders (N=48). In the exploration phase, 
identifying needs and requirements for the intervention, 28 participants gave 
input, including male and female cancer survivors (n=11) representing a wide age 
range (31-81 years) and cancer diagnoses, healthcare providers (n=8) including 
psychosocial oncology experts, and eHealth experts (n=9) including information 
technology design and developers. To ensure user involvement in each phase 
various user-centered design and service design methods were included, such as 
interviews, usability testing, and think aloud processes. Overall, participants 
were involved usability testing in the software development and formative 
evaluation phase, including cancer survivors (n=6), healthy volunteers (n=7), 
health care providers (n=2), and eHealth experts (n=5). Intervention content was 
developed by stress management experts based on well-known cognitive behavioral 
stress management strategies and adjusted to electronic format through multiple 
iterations with stakeholders. Privacy and security issues were considered 
throughout.
RESULTS: The design and development process identified a variety of stakeholder 
requirements. Cancer survivors preferred stress management through a mobile app 
rather than through a personal computer (PC) and identified usefulness, easy 
access, user friendliness, use of easily understandable language, and many brief 
sections rather than longer ones as important components of the intervention. 
These requirements were also supported by recommendations from health care 
providers and eHealth experts. The final intervention was named StressProffen 
and the hospital Privacy and Security Protection Committee was part of the final 
intervention approval to also ensure anchoring in the hospital organization.
CONCLUSIONS: Interventions, even evidence-based, have little impact if not 
actively used. This study illustrates how user-centered design and service 
design can be applied to identify and incorporate essential stakeholder aspects 
in the entire design and development process. In combination with evidence-based 
concepts, this process facilitated development of a stress management 
intervention truly designed for the end users, in this case, cancer survivors.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02939612; 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02939612 (Archived at WebCite at 
http://www.webcitation.org/71l9HcfcB).

©Elin Børøsund, Jelena Mirkovic, Matthew M Clark, Shawna L Ehlers, Michael A 
Andrykowski, Anne Bergland, Marianne Westeng, Lise Solberg Nes. Originally 
published in JMIR Formative Research (http://formative.jmir.org), 06.09.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/formative.9954
PMCID: PMC6334690
PMID: 30684438

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


14. BioData Min. 2016 Apr 27;9:16. doi: 10.1186/s13040-016-0095-3. eCollection 2016.

Visual programming for next-generation sequencing data analytics.

Milicchio F(1), Rose R(2), Bian J(3), Min J(4), Prosperi M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Engineering, Roma Tre University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Bioinfoexperts, LLC, Thibodaux, LA USA.
(3)Department of Health Outcomes and Policy, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health and Health Professions & 
College of Medicine, University of Florida, 2004 Mowry Road, Gainesville, 
32610-0231 FL USA.

BACKGROUND: High-throughput or next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies 
have become an established and affordable experimental framework in biological 
and medical sciences for all basic and translational research. Processing and 
analyzing NGS data is challenging. NGS data are big, heterogeneous, sparse, and 
error prone. Although a plethora of tools for NGS data analysis has emerged in 
the past decade, (i) software development is still lagging behind data 
generation capabilities, and (ii) there is a 'cultural' gap between the end user 
and the developer.
TEXT: Generic software template libraries specifically developed for NGS can 
help in dealing with the former problem, whilst coupling template libraries with 
visual programming may help with the latter. Here we scrutinize the 
state-of-the-art low-level software libraries implemented specifically for NGS 
and graphical tools for NGS analytics. An ideal developing environment for NGS 
should be modular (with a native library interface), scalable in computational 
methods (i.e. serial, multithread, distributed), transparent 
(platform-independent), interoperable (with external software interface), and 
usable (via an intuitive graphical user interface). These characteristics should 
facilitate both the run of standardized NGS pipelines and the development of new 
workflows based on technological advancements or users' needs. We discuss in 
detail the potential of a computational framework blending generic template 
programming and visual programming that addresses all of the current 
limitations.
CONCLUSION: In the long term, a proper, well-developed (although not necessarily 
unique) software framework will bridge the current gap between data generation 
and hypothesis testing. This will eventually facilitate the development of novel 
diagnostic tools embedded in routine healthcare.

DOI: 10.1186/s13040-016-0095-3
PMCID: PMC4848821
PMID: 27127540


15. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2019 Aug 21;264:868-872. doi: 10.3233/SHTI190347.

IEC 62304 Ed. 2: Software Life Cycle Standard for Health Software.

Värri A(1), Kranz-Zuppan P(2), de la Cruz R(3).

Author information:
(1)Tampere University, Tampere, Finland.
(2)Medtronic, plc, Mounds View, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Silver Lake Group, Inc. (SLGI), Minnetonka, Minnesota, USA.

The quality of software is high in medical devices due to the strict regulatory 
requirements and their implementation in the software development processes 
through the use of the IEC 62304 standard. The goal of this standard revision 
project was to extend the scope of the standard to all health software and also 
to bring the requirements of the 12 year old standard back to the 
state-of-the-art including provisions for cybersecurity. The joint IEC/SC62A and 
ISO/TC215 project team revised the standard and adapted its risk management, 
usability, and security requirements to serve both the medical device industry 
and the overall health software industry. The resulting second version of the 
standard has gone through a multistage global voting process to achieve a 
consensus of the requirements to serve both these communities. The resulting 
standard has potential to have a major impact on the quality of software used in 
health care globally.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI190347
PMID: 31438048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2015;216:968.

A Model for Usability Evaluation for the Development and Implementation of 
Consumer eHealth Interventions.

Parry D(1), Carter P(1), Koziol-McLain J(2), Feather J(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer and Mathematical Science, Auckland University of 
Technology, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Faculty of Health & Environmental Sciences, Auckland University of 
Technology, Auckland, New Zealand.

Consumer eHealth products are often used by people in their own homes or other 
settings without dedicated clinical supervision, and often with minimal training 
and limited support--much as eCommerce and eGovernment applications are 
currently deployed. Internet based self-care systems have been advocated for 
over a decade as a way to reduce costs and allow more convenient care, 
and--because of the expectation that they will be used to reduced health cost--, 
by increasing self-care and avoiding hospitalization. However, the history of 
consumer eHealth interventions is mixed, with many unsuccessful implementations. 
Many consumer eHealth products will form part of a broader complex intervention, 
with many possible benefits and effects on both individuals and society. This 
poster describes a model of consumer eHealth assessment based on multiple 
methods of usability evaluation at different stages in the design and fielding 
of eHealth systems. We argue that different methods of usability evaluation are 
able to give valuable insights into the likely effects of an intervention in a 
way that is congruent with software development processes.

PMID: 26262270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Methods Inf Med. 2012;51(5):441-8. doi: 10.3414/ME11-02-0031. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

MITK diffusion imaging.

Fritzsche KH(1), Neher PF, Reicht I, van Bruggen T, Goch C, Reisert M, Nolden M, 
Zelzer S, Meinzer HP, Stieltjes B.

Author information:
(1)German Cancer Research Centre, E 130 - Division of Medical and Biological 
Informatics, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. 
k.fritzsche@dkfz-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUND: Diffusion-MRI provides a unique window on brain anatomy and insights 
into aspects of tissue structure in living humans that could not be studied 
previously. There is a major effort in this rapidly evolving field of research 
to develop the algorithmic tools necessary to cope with the complexity of the 
datasets.
OBJECTIVES: This work illustrates our strategy that encompasses the development 
of a modularized and open software tool for data processing, visualization and 
interactive exploration in diffusion imaging research and aims at reinforcing 
sustainable evaluation and progress in the field.
METHODS: In this paper, the usability and capabilities of a new application and 
toolkit component of the Medical Imaging and Interaction Toolkit (MITK, 
www.mitk.org), MITK-DI, are demonstrated using in-vivo datasets.
RESULTS: MITK-DI provides a comprehensive software framework for 
high-performance data processing, analysis and interactive data exploration, 
which is designed in a modular, extensible fashion (using CTK) and in adherence 
to widely accepted coding standards (e.g. ITK, VTK). MITK-DI is available both 
as an open source software development toolkit and as a ready-to-use installable 
application.
CONCLUSIONS: The open source release of the modular MITK-DI tools will increase 
verifiability and comparability within the research community and will also be 
an important step towards bringing many of the current techniques towards 
clinical application.

DOI: 10.3414/ME11-02-0031
PMID: 23038239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2018 Sep 11;6(9):e10074. doi: 10.2196/10074.

A Smartphone App and Personalized Text Messaging Framework (InDEx) to Monitor 
and Reduce Alcohol Use in Ex-Serving Personnel: Development and Feasibility 
Study.

Leightley D(1), Puddephatt JA(2), Jones N(3), Mahmoodi T(4), Chui Z(5), Field 
M(2)(6), Drummond C(7)(8), Rona RJ(1), Fear NT(1)(3), Goodwin L(2).

Author information:
(1)King's Centre for Military Health Research, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Academic Department of Military Mental Health, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Informatics, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)UK Centre for Tobacco and Alcohol Studies, Department of Psychological 
Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(7)Addictions Department, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, 
King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(8)South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Self-reported alcohol misuse remains high in armed forces personnel 
even after they have left service. More than 50% of ex-serving personnel meet 
the criteria for hazardous alcohol use; however, many fail to acknowledge that 
they have a problem. Previous research indicates that interventions delivered 
via smartphone apps are suitable in promoting self-monitoring of alcohol use, 
have a broad reach, and may be more cost-effective than other types of brief 
interventions. There is currently no such intervention specifically designed for 
the armed forces.
OBJECTIVE: This study sought to describe the development of a tailored 
smartphone app and personalized text messaging (short message service, SMS) 
framework and to test the usability and feasibility (measured and reported as 
user engagement) of this app in a hard-to-engage ex-serving population.
METHODS: App development used Agile methodology (an incremental, iterative 
approach used in software development) and was informed by behavior change 
theory, participant feedback, and focus groups. Participants were recruited 
between May 2017 and June 2017 from an existing United Kingdom longitudinal 
military health and well-being cohort study, prescreened for eligibility, and 
directed to download either Android or iOS versions of the "Information about 
Drinking for Ex-serving personnel" (InDEx) app. Through the app, participants 
were asked to record alcohol consumption, complete a range of self-report 
measures, and set goals using implementation intentions (if-then plans). 
Alongside the app, participants received daily automated personalized text 
messages (SMS) corresponding to specific behavior change techniques with content 
informed by the health action process approach with the intended purpose of 
promoting the use of the drinks diary, suggesting alternative behaviors, and 
providing feedback on goals setting.
RESULTS: Invitations to take part in the study were sent to ex-serving 
personnel, 22.6% (31/137) of whom accepted and downloaded the app. Participants 
opened the InDEx app a median of 15.0 (interquartile range [IQR] 8.5-19.0) times 
during the 4 week period (28 days), received an average of 36.1 (SD 3.2) text 
messages (SMS), consumed alcohol on a median of 13.0 (IQR 11.0-15.0) days, and 
consumed a median of 5.6 (IQR 3.3-11.8) units per drinking day in the first 
week, which decreased to 4.7 (IQR 2.0-6.9) units by the last week and remained 
active for 4.0 (IQR 3.0-4.0) weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: Personnel engaged and used the app regularly as demonstrated by the 
number of initializations, interactions, and time spent using InDEx. Future 
research is needed to evaluate the engagement with and efficacy of InDEx for the 
reduction of alcohol consumption and binge drinking in an armed forces 
population.

©Daniel Leightley, Jo-Anne Puddephatt, Norman Jones, Toktam Mahmoodi, Zoe Chui, 
Matt Field, Colin Drummond, Roberto J Rona, Nicola T Fear, Laura Goodwin. 
Originally published in JMIR Mhealth and Uhealth (http://mhealth.jmir.org), 
11.09.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/10074
PMCID: PMC6231744
PMID: 30206054

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: NTF is a member of the 
Independent Group Advising on the Release of Data for NHS (National Health 
Service) Digital and a trustee of The Warrior Programme. NJ is a serving member 
of the UK armed forces, but was not directed in any way by the Ministry of 
Defence. CD is partly funded by the National Institute for Health Research 
(NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health at South London and Maudsley 
NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London and partly funded by the NIHR 
Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care South London 
at King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust.


19. Int J Biol Sci. 2018 May 22;14(8):907-919. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.24617. eCollection 
2018.

MicroShare: Privacy-Preserved Medical Resource Sharing through MicroService 
Architecture.

Yang Y(1)(2), Zu Q(2), Liu P(2), Ouyang D(1), Li X(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of 
Chinese Medical Sciences (ICMS), University of Macau, Macau, China.
(2)Department of Computer and Information Science, Faculty of Science and 
Technology, University of Macau, Macau, China.

This paper takes up the problem of medical resource sharing through MicroService 
architecture without compromising patient privacy. To achieve this goal, we 
suggest refactoring the legacy EHR systems into autonomous MicroServices 
communicating by the unified techniques such as RESTFul web service. This lets 
us handle clinical data queries directly and far more efficiently for both 
internal and external queries. The novelty of the proposed approach lies in 
avoiding the data de-identification process often used as a means of preserving 
patient privacy. The implemented toolkit combines software engineering 
technologies such as Java EE, RESTful web services, JSON Web Tokens to allow 
exchanging medical data in an unidentifiable XML and JSON format as well as 
restricting users to the need-to-know principle. Our technique also inhibits 
retrospective processing of data such as attacks by an adversary on a medical 
dataset using advanced computational methods to reveal Protected Health 
Information (PHI). The approach is validated on an endoscopic reporting 
application based on openEHR and MST standards. From the usability perspective, 
the approach can be used to query datasets by clinical researchers, governmental 
or non-governmental organizations in monitoring health care and medical record 
services to improve quality of care and treatment.

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.24617
PMCID: PMC6036760
PMID: 29989095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.


20. JMIR Hum Factors. 2018 Nov 28;5(4):e10721. doi: 10.2196/10721.

Bridging the Gap Between Academic Research and Pragmatic Needs in Usability: A 
Hybrid Approach to Usability Evaluation of Health Care Information Systems.

Mann DM(#)(1)(2), Chokshi SK(#)(1), Kushniruk A(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health, School of Medicine, New York University, New 
York, NY, United States.
(2)Medical Center Information Technology, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, 
United States.
(3)School of Health Information Science, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, 
Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Technology is increasingly embedded into the full spectrum of health 
care. This movement has benefited from the application of software development 
practices such as usability testing and agile development processes. These 
practices are frequently applied in both commercial or operational and academic 
settings. However, the relative importance placed on rapid iteration, validity, 
reproducibility, generalizability, and efficiency differs between the 2 settings 
and the needs and objectives of academic versus pragmatic usability evaluations.
OBJECTIVE: This paper explores how usability evaluation typically varies on key 
dimensions in pragmatic versus academic settings that impact the rapidity, 
validity, and reproducibility of findings and proposes a hybrid approach aimed 
at satisfying both pragmatic and academic objectives.
METHODS: We outline the characteristics of pragmatic versus academically 
oriented usability testing in health care, describe the tensions and gaps 
resulting from differing contexts and goals, and present a model of this hybrid 
process along with 2 case studies of digital development projects in which we 
demonstrate this integrated approach to usability evaluation.
RESULTS: The case studies presented illustrate design choices characteristic of 
our hybrid approach to usability evaluation.
CONCLUSIONS: Designed to leverage the strengths of both pragmatically and 
academically focused usability studies, a hybrid approach allows new development 
projects to efficiently iterate and optimize from usability data as well as 
preserves the ability of these projects to produce deeper insights via thorough 
qualitative analysis to inform further tool development and usability research 
by way of academically focused dissemination.

©Devin M Mann, Sara Kuppin Chokshi, Andre Kushniruk. Originally published in 
JMIR Human Factors (http://humanfactors.jmir.org), 28.11.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/10721
PMCID: PMC6291682
PMID: 30487119

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


21. Malar J. 2018 Nov 13;17(1):422. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2572-2.

ResistanceSim: development and acceptability study of a serious game to improve 
understanding of insecticide resistance management in vector control programmes.

Thomsen EK(1), Hemingway C(1), South A(1), Duda KA(1), Dormann C(1), Farmer 
R(2), Coleman M(3), Coleman M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK.
(2)Extra Mile Studios, 142 West Nile St, Glasgow, G1 2RQ, UK.
(3)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK. 
michael.coleman@lstmed.ac.uk.
(4)IVCC, Pembroke Pl, Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK.

The use of insecticides is the cornerstone of effective malaria vector control. 
However, the last two decades has seen the ubiquitous use of insecticides, 
predominantly pyrethroids, causing widespread insecticide resistance and 
compromising the effectiveness of vector control. Considerable efforts to 
develop new active ingredients and interventions are underway. However, it is 
essential to deploy strategies to mitigate the impact of insecticide resistance 
now, both to maintain the efficacy of currently available tools as well as to 
ensure the sustainability of new tools as they come to market. Although the 
World Health Organization disseminated best practice guidelines for insecticide 
resistance management (IRM), Rollback Malaria's Vector Control Working Group 
identified the lack of practical knowledge of IRM as the primary gap in the 
translation of evidence into policy. ResistanceSim is a capacity strengthening 
tool designed to address this gap. The development process involved frequent 
stakeholder consultation, including two separate workshops. These workshops 
defined the learning objectives, target audience, and the role of mathematical 
models in the game. Software development phases were interspersed with frequent 
user testing, resulting in an iterative design process. User feedback was 
evaluated via questionnaires with Likert-scale and open-ended questions. The 
game was regularly evaluated by subject-area experts through meetings of an 
external advisory panel. Through these processes, a series of learning domains 
were identified and a set of specific learning objectives for each domain were 
defined to be communicated to vector control programme personnel. A simple "game 
model" was proposed that produces realistic outputs based on player strategy and 
also runs in real-time. Early testing sessions revealed numerous usability 
issues that prevented adequate player engagement. After extensive revisions, 
later testing sessions indicated that the tool would be a valuable addition to 
IRM training.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2572-2
PMCID: PMC6234623
PMID: 30424788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2019 Apr;171:19-26. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.02.011. Epub 2019 Feb 21.

Polymorph segmentation representation for medical image computing.

Pinter C(1), Lasso A(2), Fichtinger G(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Percutaneous Surgery, School of Computing, 557 Goodwin Hall, 
Queen's University, K7L 2N8, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: 
csaba.pinter@queensu.ca.
(2)Laboratory for Percutaneous Surgery, School of Computing, 557 Goodwin Hall, 
Queen's University, K7L 2N8, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Segmentation is a ubiquitous operation in medical 
image computing. Various data representations can describe segmentation results, 
such as labelmap volumes or surface models. Conversions between them are often 
required, which typically include complex data processing steps. We identified 
four challenges related to managing multiple representations: conversion method 
selection, data provenance, data consistency, and coherence of in-memory 
objects.
METHODS: A complex data container preserves identity and provenance of the 
contained representations and ensures data coherence. Conversions are executed 
automatically on-demand. A graph containing the implemented conversion 
algorithms determines each execution, ensuring consistency between various 
representations. The design and implementation of a software library are 
proposed, in order to provide a readily usable software tool to manage 
segmentation data in multiple data representations. A low-level core library 
called PolySeg implemented in the Visualization Toolkit (VTK) manages the data 
objects and conversions. It is used by a high-level application layer, which has 
been implemented in the medical image visualization and analysis platform 3D 
Slicer. The application layer provides advanced visualization, transformation, 
interoperability, and other functions.
RESULTS: The core conversion algorithms comprising the graph were validated. 
Several applications were implemented based on the library, demonstrating 
advantages in terms of usability and ease of software development in each case. 
The Segment Editor application provides fast, comprehensive, and easy-to-use 
manual and semi-automatic segmentation workflows. Clinical applications for gel 
dosimetry, external beam planning, and MRI-ultrasound image fusion in 
brachytherapy were rapidly prototyped resulting robust applications that are 
already in use in clinical research. The conversion algorithms were found to be 
accurate and reliable using these applications.
CONCLUSIONS: A generic software library has been designed and developed for 
automatic management of multiple data formats in segmentation tasks. It enhances 
both user and developer experience, enabling fast and convenient manual 
workflows and quicker and more robust software prototyping. The software's 
BSD-style open-source license allows complete freedom of use of the library.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.02.011
PMID: 30902247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2014;201:211-8.

Collaborative software development for a Brazilian telehealth program.

Sanches LM(1), Harris MR(2), Abbott PA(2), Novaes MA(3), Lopes MH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing CAV. Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife, PE, 
Brazil.
(2)School of Nursing, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Telehealth Center NUTES. Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife, PE, 
Brazil.
(4)Department of Nursing, University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Telehealth services in the State of Pernambuco, Brazil are led by the Telehealth 
Center (RedeNUTES) and based on HealthNet 2.0 software. Among the 
tele-assistance services, health professionals have clinical discussions focused 
on second opinions. This paper reports the experience in a PhD study through 
mixed-methods, to evaluate the telehealth services, planning and modeling a new 
tool to improve a telehealth system. We described the nurse's role in each phase 
of this study. The method of User-Centered Design was explored in three phases 
as Identification of work process, User's perception and collaborative modeling, 
Observational usability study. The main frame was based on collaborative 
techniques as Collaborative Prototype Design Process, cognitive walkthrough, and 
thinking-aloud. The users also identified all usability problems identified by 
the evaluators. The methods were useful in identifying usability problems, and 
easy to employ using standard equipment and software thus a relatively low cost 
approach to usability testing.

PMID: 24943546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. JCO Clin Cancer Inform. 2019 Sep;3:1-17. doi: 10.1200/CCI.18.00120.

Multidisciplinary Software Design for the Routine Monitoring and Assessment of 
Pain in Palliative Care Services: The Development of PainCheck.

Allsop MJ(1), Johnson O(1)(2), Taylor S(1), Hackett J(1), Allen P(1), Bennett 
MI(1), Bewick BM(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(2)X-Lab, Leeds, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: The use of health information technology (HIT) to support patient and 
health professional communication is emerging as a core component of modern 
cancer care. Approaches to HIT development for cancer care are often 
underreported, despite their implementation in complex, multidisciplinary 
environments, typically supporting patients with multifaceted needs. We describe 
the development and evaluation of an e-health tool for pain management in 
patients with advanced cancer, arising from collaboration between health 
researchers and a commercial software development company.
METHODS: We adopted a research-led development process, involving patients with 
advanced cancer and their health professionals, focusing on use within real 
clinical settings. A software development approach (disciplined agile delivery) 
was combined with health science research methods (ie, diary studies, 
face-to-face interviews, questionnaires, prototyping, think aloud, process 
reviews, and pilots). Three software iterations were managed through three 
disciplined agile delivery phases to develop PainCheck and prepare it for use in 
a clinical trial.
RESULTS: Findings from development phases (inception, elaboration, and 
construction) informed the design and implementation of PainCheck. During the 
transition phase, where PainCheck was evaluated in a randomized clinical trial, 
there was variation in the extent of engagement by patients and health 
professionals. Prior personal experience and confidence with HIT led to a 
gatekeeping effect among health professionals, who were reluctant to introduce 
PainCheck to patients. Patients who did use PainCheck seemed to benefit, and no 
usability issues were reported.
CONCLUSION: Health science research methods seemed to help in the development of 
PainCheck, although a more rigorous application of implementation science 
methodologies might help to elucidate further the barriers and facilitators to 
adoption and inform an evidence-based plan for future implementation.

DOI: 10.1200/CCI.18.00120
PMCID: PMC6873922
PMID: 31577449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I 
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate 
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's 
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/cci/author-center. Open Payments is a public database containing 
information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed physicians 
(Open Payments). OWEN JOHNSON: Leadership: X-Lab Stock and Other Ownership 
Interests: X-Lab Consulting or Advisory Role: Advanced Digital Interaction 
Shipley Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: X-Lab PETER ALLEN: Consulting or 
Advisory Role: Sanofi Research Funding: Novartis MICHAEL I. BENNETT: Consulting 
or Advisory Role: Shionogi No other potential conflicts of interest were 
reported.


25. Int J Med Inform. 2018 Jul;115:24-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.04.007. Epub 
2018 Apr 16.

The design and evaluation of an antimicrobial resistance surveillance system for 
neonatal intensive care units in Iran.

Rezaei-Hachesu P(1), Samad-Soltani T(2), Yaghoubi S(3), GhaziSaeedi M(4), Mirnia 
K(5), Masoumi-Asl H(6), Safdari R(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Management and Medical Informatics, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)School of Management and Medical Informatics, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. Electronic address: samadsoltani@tbzmed.ac.ir.
(3)Asadabad Faculty of Medical Sciences, Asadabad, Iran.
(4)School of Allied Medical Sciences, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Paediatrics Research Centre, School of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(6)Centre for Communicable Disease Control, Ministry of Health and Medical 
Education, Tehran, Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Neonatal intensive care units (NICUs) have complex patients in 
terms of their diagnoses and required treatments. Antimicrobial treatment is a 
common therapy for patients in NICUs. To solve problems pertaining to empirical 
therapy, antimicrobial stewardship programs have recently been introduced. 
Despite the success of these programs in terms of data collection, there is 
still inefficiency in terms of analyzing and reporting the data. Thus, to 
successfully implement these stewardship programs, the design of antimicrobial 
resistance (AMR) surveillance systems is recommended as a first step. As a 
result, this study aimed to design an AMR surveillance system for use in the 
NICUs in northwestern Iranian hospitals to cover these information gaps.
METHODS: The recommended system is compatible with the World Health Organization 
(WHO) guidelines. The business intelligence (BI) requirements were extracted in 
an interview with a product owner (PO) using a valid and reliable checklist. 
Following this, an AMR surveillance system was designed and evaluated in 
relation to user experiences via a user experience questionnaire (UEQ). Finally, 
an association analysis was performed on the database, and the results were 
reported by identifying the important multidrug resistances in the database.
RESULTS: A customized software development methodology was proposed. The three 
major modules of the AMR surveillance are the data registry, dashboard, and 
decision support modules. The data registry module was implemented based on a 
three-tier architecture, and the Clinical Decision Support System (CDSS) and 
dashboard modules were designed based on the BI requirements of the Scrum 
product owner (PO). The mean values of UEQ measures were in a good range. This 
measures showed the suitable usability of the AMR surveillance system.
CONCLUSION: Applying efficient software development methodologies allows for the 
systems' compatibility with users' opinions and requirements. In addition, the 
construction of interdisciplinary communication models for research and software 
engineering allows for research and development concepts to be used in 
operational environments.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.04.007
PMID: 29779717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. JMIR Med Educ. 2016 Jun 1;2(1):e7. doi: 10.2196/mededu.5336.

Enabling Access to Medical and Health Education in Rwanda Using Mobile 
Technology: Needs Assessment for the Development of Mobile Medical Educator 
Apps.

Rusatira JC(1), Tomaszewski B, Dusabejambo V, Ndayiragije V, Gonsalves S, Sawant 
A, Mumararungu A, Gasana G, Amendezo E, Haake A, Mutesa L.

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Rwanda, Kigali, 
Rwanda. rusatirac2001@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Lack of access to health and medical education resources for doctors 
in the developing world is a serious global health problem. In Rwanda, with a 
population of 11 million, there is only one medical school, hence a shortage in 
well-trained medical staff. The growth of interactive health technologies has 
played a role in the improvement of health care in developed countries and has 
offered alternative ways to offer continuous medical education while improving 
patient's care. However, low and middle-income countries (LMIC) like Rwanda have 
struggled to implement medical education technologies adapted to local settings 
in medical practice and continuing education. Developing a user-centered mobile 
computing approach for medical and health education programs has potential to 
bring continuous medical education to doctors in rural and urban areas of Rwanda 
and influence patient care outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to determine user requirements, currently 
available resources, and perspectives for potential medical education 
technologies in Rwanda.
METHODS: Information baseline and needs assessments data collection were 
conducted in all 44 district hospitals (DHs) throughout Rwanda. The research 
team collected qualitative data through interviews with 16 general practitioners 
working across Rwanda and 97 self-administered online questionnaires for rural 
areas. Data were collected and analyzed to address two key questions: (1) what 
are the currently available tools for the use of mobile-based technology for 
medical education in Rwanda, and (2) what are user's requirements for the 
creation of a mobile medical education technology in Rwanda?
RESULTS: General practitioners from different hospitals highlighted that none of 
the available technologies avail local resources such as the Ministry of Health 
(MOH) clinical treatment guidelines. Considering the number of patients that 
doctors see in Rwanda, an average of 32 patients per day, there is need for a 
locally adapted mobile education app that utilizes specific Rwandan medical 
education resources. Based on our results, we propose a mobile medical education 
app that could provide many benefits such as rapid decision making with lower 
error rates, increasing the quality of data management and accessibility, and 
improving practice efficiency and knowledge. In areas where Internet access is 
limited, the proposed mobile medical education app would need to run on a mobile 
device without Internet access.
CONCLUSIONS: A user-centered design approach was adopted, starting with a needs 
assessment with representative end users, which provided recommendations for the 
development of a mobile medical education app specific to Rwanda. Specific app 
features were identified through the needs assessment and it was evident that 
there will be future benefits to ongoing incorporation of user-centered design 
methods to better inform the software development and improve its usability. 
Results of the user-centered design reported here can inform other medical 
education technology developments in LMIC to ensure that technologies developed 
are usable by all stakeholders.

DOI: 10.2196/mededu.5336
PMCID: PMC5041362
PMID: 27731861

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


27. JMIR Hum Factors. 2018 May 17;5(2):e21. doi: 10.2196/humanfactors.8905.

Development of a Just-in-Time Adaptive mHealth Intervention for Insomnia: 
Usability Study.

Pulantara IW(1), Parmanto B(1), Germain A(2).

Author information:
(1)Health and Rehabilitation Informatics Laboratory, Department of Health 
Information Management, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(2)Sleep and Chronobiology Laboratories, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Healthy sleep is a fundamental component of physical and brain 
health. Insomnia, however, is a prevalent sleep disorder that compromises 
functioning, productivity, and health. Therefore, developing efficient treatment 
delivery methods for insomnia can have significant societal and personal health 
impacts. Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBTI) is the recommended 
first-line treatment of insomnia but access is currently limited for patients, 
since treatment must occur in specialty sleep clinics, which suffer from an 
insufficient number of trained clinicians. Smartphone-based interventions offer 
a promising means for improving the delivery of CBTI. Furthermore, novel 
features such as real-time monitoring and assessment, personalization, dynamic 
adaptations of the intervention, and context awareness can enhance treatment 
personalization and effectiveness, and reduce associated costs. Ultimately, this 
"Just in Time Adaptive Intervention" for insomnia-an intervention approach that 
is acceptable to patients and clinicians, and is based on mobile health 
(mHealth) platform and tools-can significantly improve patient access and 
clinician delivery of evidence-based insomnia treatments.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to develop and assess the usability of a Just in Time 
Adaptive Intervention application platform called iREST ("interactive Resilience 
Enhancing Sleep Tactics") for use in behavioral insomnia interventions. iREST 
can be used by both patients and clinicians.
METHODS: The development of iREST was based on the Iterative and Incremental 
Development software development model. Requirement analysis was based on the 
case study's description, workflow and needs, clinician inputs, and a previously 
conducted BBTI military study/implementation of the Just in Time Adaptive 
Intervention architecture. To evaluate the usability of the iREST mHealth tool, 
a pilot usability study was conducted. Additionally, this study explores the 
feasibility of using an off-the-shelf wearable device to supplement the 
subjective assessment of patient sleep patterns.
RESULTS: The iREST app was developed from the mobile logical architecture of 
Just in Time Adaptive Intervention. It consists of a cross-platform smartphone 
app, a clinician portal, and secure 2-way communications platform between the 
app and the portal. The usability study comprised 19 Active Duty Service Members 
and Veterans between the ages of 18 and 60. Descriptive statistics based on 
in-app questionnaires indicate that on average, 12 (mean 12.23, SD 8.96) unique 
devices accessed the clinician portal per day for more than two years, while the 
app was rated as "highly usable", achieving a mean System Usability Score score 
of 85.74 (SD 12.37), which translates to an adjective rating of "Excellent". The 
participants also gave high scores on "ease of use and learnability" with an 
average score of 4.33 (SD 0.65) on a scale of 1 to 5.
CONCLUSIONS: iREST provides a feasible platform for the implementation of Just 
in Time Adaptive Intervention in mHealth-based and remote intervention settings. 
The system was rated highly usable and its cross-platformness made it readily 
implemented within the heavily segregated smartphone market. The use of 
wearables to track sleep is promising; yet the accuracy of this technology needs 
further improvement. Ultimately, iREST demonstrates that mHealth-based Just in 
Time Adaptive Intervention is not only feasible, but also works effectively.

©I Wayan Pulantara, Bambang Parmanto, Anne Germain. Originally published in JMIR 
Human Factors (http://humanfactors.jmir.org), 17.05.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/humanfactors.8905
PMCID: PMC5981058
PMID: 29773529

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared


28. J Med Syst. 2018 May 8;42(6):113. doi: 10.1007/s10916-018-0968-8.

Towards a Clinical Trial Protocol to Evaluate Health Information Systems: 
Evaluation of a Computerized System for Monitoring Tuberculosis from a Patient 
Perspective in Brazil.

Crepaldi NY(1)(2), de Lima IB(3)(4), Vicentine FB(5), Rodrigues LML(5), Sanches 
TLM(3), Ruffino-Netto A(5), Alves D(5)(3), Rijo RPCL(3)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social Medicine, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of 
São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 14049-900, Brazil. nathaliayc@gmail.com.
(2)Intelligence Laboratory in Health, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University 
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 14049-900, Brazil. nathaliayc@gmail.com.
(3)Intelligence Laboratory in Health, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University 
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 14049-900, Brazil.
(4)Ribeirão Preto College of Nursing, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 
14040-902, Brazil.
(5)Department of Social Medicine, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of 
São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 14049-900, Brazil.
(6)School of Technology and Management, Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, 
2411-901, Leiria, Portugal.
(7)INESCC - Institute for Systems and Computers Engineering at Coimbra, 
3000-033, Coimbra, Portugal.
(8)CINTESIS - Center for Research in Health Technologies and Information 
Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, 4200-450, Porto, Portugal.

Assessment of health information systems consider different aspects of the 
system itself. They focus or on the professional who will use the software or on 
its usability or on the software engineering metrics or on financial and 
managerial issues. The existent approaches are very resources consuming, 
disconnected, and not standardized. As the software becomes more critical in the 
health organizations and in patients, becoming used as a medical device or a 
medicine, there is an urgency to identify tools and methods that can be applied 
in the development process. The present work is one of the steps of a broader 
study to identify standardized protocols to evaluate the health information 
systems as medicines and medical devices are evaluated by clinical trials. The 
goal of the present work was to evaluate the effect of the introduction of an 
information system for monitoring tuberculosis treatment (SISTB) in a Brazilian 
municipality from the patients' perspective. The Patient Satisfaction 
Questionnaire and the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and 
Systems were answered by the patients before and after the SISTB introduction, 
for comparison. Patients from an outpatient clinic, formed the control group, 
that is, at this site was not implanted the SISTB. Descriptive statistics and 
mixed effects model were used for data analysis. Eighty-eight interviews were 
conducted in the study. The questionnaire's results presented better averages 
after the system introduction but were not considered statistically significant. 
Therefore, it was not possible to associate system implantation with improved 
patient satisfaction. The HIS evaluation need be complete, the technical and 
managerial evaluation, the safety, the impact on the professionals and direct 
and/or indirect impact on patients are important. Developing the right tools and 
methods that can evaluate the software in its entirety, from the beginning of 
the development cycle with a normalized scale, are needed.

DOI: 10.1007/s10916-018-0968-8
PMID: 29737418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Multidiscip Healthc. 2018 Jan 9;11:21-37. doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S150976. 
eCollection 2018.

Human-centered design of a personal health record system for metabolic syndrome 
management based on the ISO 9241-210:2010 standard.

Farinango CD(1), Benavides JS(1), Cerón JD(1), López DM(1), Álvarez RE(2).

Author information:
(1)Telematics Engineering Research Group, Faculty of Electronics and 
Telecommunications Engineering, Universidad del Cauca, Popayán, Colombia.
(2)Human Genetics Research Group, Faculty of Health Sciences, Universidad del 
Cauca, Popayán, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of information 
and communication technologies to support healthy lifestyle interventions. In 
particular, personal health record systems (PHR-Ss) empower self-care, essential 
to support lifestyle changes. Approaches such as the user-centered design (UCD), 
which is already a standard within the software industry (ISO 9241-210:2010), 
provide specifications and guidelines to guarantee user acceptance and quality 
of eHealth systems. However, no single PHR-S for metabolic syndrome (MS) 
developed following the recommendations of the ISO 9241-210:2010 specification 
has been found in the literature.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to describe the development of a PHR-S for 
the management of MS according to the principles and recommendations of the ISO 
9241-210 standard.
METHODS: The proposed PHR-S was developed using a formal software development 
process which, in addition to the traditional activities of any software 
process, included the principles and recommendations of the ISO 9241-210 
standard. To gather user information, a survey sample of 1,187 individuals, 
eight interviews, and a focus group with seven people were performed. Throughout 
five iterations, three prototypes were built. Potential users of each system 
evaluated each prototype. The quality attributes of efficiency, effectiveness, 
and user satisfaction were assessed using metrics defined in the ISO/IEC 25022 
standard.
RESULTS: The following results were obtained: 1) a technology profile from 1,187 
individuals at risk for MS from the city of Popayan, Colombia, identifying that 
75.2% of the people use the Internet and 51% had a smartphone; 2) a PHR-S to 
manage MS developed (the PHR-S has the following five main functionalities: 
record the five MS risk factors, share these measures with health care 
professionals, and three educational modules on nutrition, stress management, 
and a physical activity); and 3) usability tests on each prototype obtaining the 
following results: 100% effectiveness, 100% efficiency, and 84.2 points in the 
system usability scale.
CONCLUSION: The software development methodology used was based on the ISO 
9241-210 standard, which allowed the development team to maintain a focus on 
user's needs and requirements throughout the project, which resulted in an 
increased satisfaction and acceptance of the system. Additionally, the 
establishment of a multidisciplinary team allowed the application of 
considerations not only from the disciplines of software engineering and health 
sciences but also from other disciplines such as graphical design and media 
communication. Finally, usability testing allowed the observation of flaws in 
the designs, which helped to improve the solution.

DOI: 10.2147/JMDH.S150976
PMCID: PMC5767088
PMID: 29386903

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


30. Int J Med Inform. 2017 Jan;97:98-108. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.10.001. Epub 
2016 Oct 6.

A novel concept for integrating and delivering health information using a 
comprehensive digital dashboard: An analysis of healthcare professionals' 
intention to adopt a new system and the trend of its real usage.

Lee K(1), Jung SY(2), Hwang H(3), Yoo S(4), Baek HY(5), Baek RM(6), Kim S(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Informatics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea; Department of Family Medicine, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea; Department of Orthopedics, Seoul 
National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea. Electronic address: 
chrisruga@snubh.org.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea; Department of Orthopedics, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea. Electronic address: imsyjung@gmail.com.
(3)Center for Medical Informatics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea; Department of Orthopedics, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea; Department of Pediatrics, Seoul 
National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea. Electronic address: 
neuroandy@snubh.org.
(4)Center for Medical Informatics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea; Department of Orthopedics, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea. Electronic address: yoosoo0@snubh.org.
(5)Center for Medical Informatics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea; Department of Orthopedics, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea. Electronic address: bhy210@snubh.org.
(6)Department of Plastic Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea; Department of Orthopedics, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea. Electronic address: ronbaek@snu.ac.kr.
(7)Center for Medical Informatics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea; Department of Orthopedics, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea. Electronic address: kims@snubh.org.

OBJECTIVE: To introduce a new concept of medical dashboard system called 
BESTBoard. Such a system was implemented in all wards in a tertiary academic 
hospital to explore the development process, core designs, functions, usability 
and feasibility.
METHODS: The task-force team made user interface designs for 6 months based on a 
need analysis. Hardware configuration and software development was carried out 
for 3 months. We conducted a survey of 383 physicians and nurses to determine 
the usability and feasibility of the system.
RESULTS: In March 2012, the system was installed in all wards, including the 
intensive care units, emergency rooms, operation rooms, and even delivery rooms. 
Healthcare professionals had access to all information of EHRs optimized for a 
large 55-inch touchscreen. The satisfaction rate of BESTBoard users was high, 
with a mean of 3.3 points. Voluntary users tended to consider BESTBoard as a 
good system that is useful for team round visits, interdisciplinary team 
approach, and collecting the status of the hospital rooms. Elderly users didn't 
tend to think of BESTBoard as a useful tool for interdisciplinary team approach 
and collecting the status of the hospital rooms. Greater expectations regarding 
work performance affected the users' attitudes positively. A positive attitude 
toward using the system resulted in consistent real usage and health care 
professionals' satisfaction with the new dashboard system.
CONCLUSIONS: A new concept of hospital dashboard system proved to be feasible 
and useful in delivering health information to healthcare professionals. A 
positive attitude and an expectation regarding work performance were important 
factors for intention to use the system. This finding can serve for developing 
new systems to present health information effectively. Further studies will be 
needed to evaluate the extent to which BESTBoard can have a positive impact on 
clinical care outcomes and work performance.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.10.001
PMID: 27919400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Med Inform. 2014 Mar;83(3):170-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2013.11.004. 
Epub 2013 Dec 14.

Regenstrief Institute's Medical Gopher: a next-generation homegrown electronic 
medical record system.

Duke JD(1), Morea J(2), Mamlin B(2), Martin DK(3), Simonaitis L(2), Takesue 
BY(3), Dixon BE(4), Dexter PR(2).

Author information:
(1)Regenstrief Institute Inc., Indianapolis, IN, USA; Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; School of Informatics and Computing, IUPUI, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA; Wishard/Eskenazi Health Services, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
Electronic address: jonduke@regenstrief.org.
(2)Regenstrief Institute Inc., Indianapolis, IN, USA; Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Wishard/Eskenazi Health Services, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)Regenstrief Institute Inc., Indianapolis, IN, USA; Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(4)Regenstrief Institute Inc., Indianapolis, IN, USA; Center for Implementing 
Evidence-Based Practice, Department of Veterans Affairs, Health Services 
Research & Development Service, Indianapolis, IN, USA; School of Informatics and 
Computing, IUPUI, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Regenstrief Institute developed one of the seminal computerized order 
entry systems, the Medical Gopher, for implementation at Wishard Hospital nearly 
three decades ago. Wishard Hospital and Regenstrief remain committed to 
homegrown software development, and over the past 4 years we have fully rebuilt 
Gopher with an emphasis on usability, safety, leveraging open source 
technologies, and the advancement of biomedical informatics research. Our 
objective in this paper is to summarize the functionality of this new system and 
highlight its novel features.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Applying a user-centered design process, the new Gopher 
was built upon a rich-internet application framework using an agile development 
process. The system incorporates order entry, clinical documentation, result 
viewing, decision support, and clinical workflow. We have customized its use for 
the outpatient, inpatient, and emergency department settings.
RESULTS: The new Gopher is now in use by over 1100 users a day, including an 
average of 433 physicians caring for over 3600 patients daily. The system 
includes a wizard-like clinical workflow, dynamic multimedia alerts, and a 
familiar 'e-commerce'-based interface for order entry. Clinical documentation is 
enhanced by real-time natural language processing and data review is supported 
by a rapid chart search feature.
DISCUSSION: As one of the few remaining academically developed order entry 
systems, the Gopher has been designed both to improve patient care and to 
support next-generation informatics research. It has achieved rapid adoption 
within our health system and suggests continued viability for homegrown systems 
in settings of close collaboration between developers and providers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2013.11.004
PMID: 24373714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. JMIR Serious Games. 2018 Jan 16;6(1):e2. doi: 10.2196/games.8881.

User-Centered Design of Learn to Quit, a Smoking Cessation Smartphone App for 
People With Serious Mental Illness.

Vilardaga R(1), Rizo J(1), Zeng E(2), Kientz JA(2), Ries R(3), Otis C(4), 
Hernandez K(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Addiction Science and Technology, Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States.
(2)Design Use Build, Department of Human Centered Design and Engineering, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, United States.
(4)Chad Otis Illustration & Design, Seattle, WA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Smoking rates in the United States have been reduced in the past 
decades to 15% of the general population. However, up to 88% of people with 
psychiatric symptoms still smoke, leading to high rates of disease and 
mortality. Therefore, there is a great need to develop smoking cessation 
interventions that have adequate levels of usability and can reach this 
population.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to report the rationale, ideation, 
design, user research, and final specifications of a novel smoking cessation app 
for people with serious mental illness (SMI) that will be tested in a 
feasibility trial.
METHODS: We used a variety of user-centered design methods and materials to 
develop the tailored smoking cessation app. This included expert panel guidance, 
a set of design principles and theory-based smoking cessation content, 
development of personas and paper prototyping, usability testing of the app 
prototype, establishment of app's core vision and design specification, and 
collaboration with a software development company.
RESULTS: We developed Learn to Quit, a smoking cessation app designed and 
tailored to individuals with SMI that incorporates the following: (1) 
evidence-based smoking cessation content from Acceptance and Commitment Therapy 
and US Clinical Practice Guidelines for smoking cessation aimed at providing 
skills for quitting while addressing mental health symptoms, (2) a set of 
behavioral principles to increase retention and comprehension of smoking 
cessation content, (3) a gamification component to encourage and sustain app 
engagement during a 14-day period, (4) an app structure and layout designed to 
minimize usability errors in people with SMI, and (5) a set of stories and 
visuals that communicate smoking cessation concepts and skills in simple terms.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite its increasing importance, the design and development of 
mHealth technology is typically underreported, hampering scientific innovation. 
This report describes the systematic development of the first smoking cessation 
app tailored to people with SMI, a population with very high rates of nicotine 
addiction, and offers new design strategies to engage this population. mHealth 
developers in smoking cessation and related fields could benefit from a design 
strategy that capitalizes on the role visual engagement, storytelling, and the 
systematic application of behavior analytic principles to deliver evidence-based 
content.

©Roger Vilardaga, Javier Rizo, Emily Zeng, Julie A Kientz, Richard Ries, Chad 
Otis, Kayla Hernandez. Originally published in JMIR Serious Games 
(http://games.jmir.org), 16.01.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/games.8881
PMCID: PMC5790963
PMID: 29339346

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


33. Int J Med Inform. 2009 Feb;78(2):83-103. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2008.05.009. 
Epub 2008 Jul 14.

A development framework for semantically interoperable health information 
systems.

Lopez DM(1), Blobel BG.

Author information:
(1)eHealth Competence Center, University of Regensburg Medical Center, 
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany. 
diego.lopez@ehealth-cc.de

BACKGROUND: Semantic interoperability is a basic challenge to be met for new 
generations of distributed, communicating and co-operating health information 
systems (HIS) enabling shared care and e-Health. Analysis, design, 
implementation and maintenance of such systems and intrinsic architectures have 
to follow a unified development methodology.
METHODS: The Generic Component Model (GCM) is used as a framework for modeling 
any system to evaluate and harmonize state of the art architecture development 
approaches and standards for health information systems as well as to derive a 
coherent architecture development framework for sustainable, semantically 
interoperable HIS and their components. The proposed methodology is based on the 
Rational Unified Process (RUP), taking advantage of its flexibility to be 
configured for integrating other architectural approaches such as 
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA), Model-Driven Architecture (MDA), ISO 10746, 
and HL7 Development Framework (HDF).
RESULTS: Existing architectural approaches have been analyzed, compared and 
finally harmonized towards an architecture development framework for advanced 
health information systems.
CONCLUSION: Starting with the requirements for semantic interoperability derived 
from paradigm changes for health information systems, and supported in formal 
software process engineering methods, an appropriate development framework for 
semantically interoperable HIS has been provided. The usability of the framework 
has been exemplified in a public health scenario.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2008.05.009
PMID: 18621574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Comput Inform Nurs. 2012 Jun;30(6):321-9. doi: 10.1097/NXN.0b013e31824af81f.

Developing iCare v.1.0: an academic electronic health record.

Wyatt TH(1), Li X, Indranoi C, Bell M.

Author information:
(1)College of Nursing, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996-4180, USA. 
twyatt@utk.edu

An electronic health record application, iCare v.1.0, was developed and tested 
that allows data input and retrieval while tracking student performance over 
time. The development and usability testing of iCare v.1.0 followed a rapid 
prototyping software development and testing model. Once the functionality was 
tested by engineers, the usability and feasibility testing began with a 
convenience sample of focus group members including undergraduate and graduate 
students and faculty. Three focus groups were created, and four subjects 
participated in each focus group (n = 12). Nielsen's usability heuristics and 
methods of evaluation were used to evaluate data captured from each focus group. 
Overall, users wanted a full-featured electronic health record with features 
that coached or guided users. The earliest versions of iCare v.1.0 did not 
provide help features and prompts to guide students but were later added. Future 
versions will incorporate a full-featured help section. The interface and design 
of iCare v.1.0 are similar to professional electronic health record 
applications. As a result of this usability study, future versions of iCare will 
include more robust help features along with advanced reporting and elements 
specific to specialty populations such as pediatrics and mental health services.

DOI: 10.1097/NXN.0b013e31824af81f
PMID: 22411413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol. 2017 Feb 15;4(1):e2. doi: 10.2196/rehab.6761.

Design and Development of a Telerehabilitation Platform for Patients With 
Phantom Limb Pain: A User-Centered Approach.

Rothgangel A(1)(2)(3), Braun S(1)(2), Smeets R(2)(4), Beurskens A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Autonomy and Participation of People with a Chronic 
Illness, Faculty of Health, Zuyd University of Applied Sciences Heerlen, 
Heerlen, Netherlands.
(2)CAPHRI School for Public Health and Primary Care, Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, Netherlands.
(3)Kaasa health, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(4)Libra Rehabilitation and Audiology, Eindhoven/Weert, Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Phantom limb pain is a frequent and persistent problem following 
amputation. Achieving sustainable favorable effects on phantom limb pain 
requires therapeutic interventions such as mirror therapy that target 
maladaptive neuroplastic changes in the central nervous system. Unfortunately, 
patients' adherence to unsupervised exercises is generally poor and there is a 
need for effective strategies such as telerehabilitation to support long-term 
self-management of patients with phantom limb pain.
OBJECTIVE: The main aim of this study was to describe the user-centered approach 
that guided the design and development of a telerehabilitation platform for 
patients with phantom limb pain. We addressed 3 research questions: (1) Which 
requirements are defined by patients and therapists for the content and 
functions of a telerehabilitation platform and how can these requirements be 
prioritized to develop a first prototype of the platform? (2) How can the user 
interface of the telerehabilitation platform be designed so as to match the 
predefined critical user requirements and how can this interface be translated 
into a medium-fidelity prototype of the platform? (3) How do patients with 
phantom limb pain and their treating therapists judge the usability of the 
medium-fidelity prototype of the telerehabilitation platform in routine care and 
how can the platform be redesigned based on their feedback to achieve a 
high-fidelity prototype?
METHODS: The telerehabilitation platform was developed using an iterative 
user-centered design process. In the first phase, a questionnaire followed by a 
semistructured interview was used to identify the user requirements of both the 
patients and their physical and occupational therapists, which were then 
prioritized using a decision matrix. The second phase involved designing the 
interface of the telerehabilitation platform using design sketches, wireframes, 
and interface mock-ups to develop a low-fidelity prototype. Heuristic evaluation 
resulted in a medium-fidelity prototype whose usability was tested in routine 
care in the final phase, leading to the development of a high-fidelity 
prototype.
RESULTS: A total of 7 categories of patient requirements were identified: 
monitoring, exercise programs, communication, settings, background information, 
log-in, and general requirements. One additional category emerged for 
therapists: patient management. Based on these requirements, patient and 
therapist interfaces for the telerehabilitation platform were developed and 
redesigned by the software development team in an iterative process, addressing 
the usability problems that were reported by the users during 4 weeks of field 
testing in routine care.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings underline the importance of involving the users and 
other stakeholders early and continuously in an iterative design process, as 
well as the need for clear criteria to identify critical user requirements. A 
decision matrix is presented that incorporates the views of various stakeholders 
in systematically rating and prioritizing user requirements. The findings and 
lessons learned might help health care providers, researchers, software 
designers, and other stakeholders in designing and evaluating new 
teletreatments, and hopefully increase the likelihood of user acceptance.

©Andreas Rothgangel, Susy Braun, Rob Smeets, Anna Beurskens. Originally 
published in JMIR Rehabilitation and Assistive Technology 
(http://rehab.jmir.org), 15.02.2017.

DOI: 10.2196/rehab.6761
PMCID: PMC5454587
PMID: 28582249

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: AR was partially funded 
by Kaasa health through a grant of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW, 
Germany) and the European Union through the NRW Ziel2 Program as a part of the 
European Fund for Regional Development. Kaasa health is a for-profit 
organisation, which might commercialise an improved version of the technology 
described here.


36. Version 2. JAMIA Open. 2019 Jul;2(2):272-279. doi: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz008. 
Epub 2019 Apr 13.

Pilot feasibility trial of the MyPEEPS mobile app to reduce sexual risk among 
young men in 4 cities.

Ignacio M(1), Garofalo R(2), Pearson C(1), Kuhns LM(2), Bruce J(3), Scott Batey 
D(4), Radix A(5), Belkind U(5), Hidalgo MA(6), Hirshfield S(7), Schnall R(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Social Work, Indigenous Wellness Research Institute, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Division of Adolescent Medicine, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Birmingham AIDS Outreach, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
(4)Department of Social Work, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, USA.
(5)Callen-Lorde Community Health Center, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Children's Hospital of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York, 
USA.
(8)School of Nursing, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Our study team adapted the MyPEEPS (Male Youth Pursuing Empowerment, 
Education, and Prevention around Sexuality) curriculum, an evidence-based human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) prevention intervention, from a face-to-face, 
group-based intervention to an individual-level mobile responsive web-based 
intervention to improve HIV risk behaviors in very young men, aged 13-18 years.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In adapting the MyPEEPS intervention to mobile app, we 
used a series of methodologies, including expert panel reviews, weekly team 
meetings with the software development company, and conducted in-depth 
interviews with very young men. Following the iterative process, we conducted a 
6-week pre-post feasibility pilot trial with 40 young men in Birmingham, AL; 
Chicago, IL; New York City, NY; and Seattle, WA. Primary outcomes of interest 
were uptake of the app, accessibility and satisfaction.
RESULTS: Across all 4 sites, 62.5% (25/40) of participants completed all modules 
in the app in an average of 28.85 (SD 21.69) days. Participants who did not 
attend to the follow-up visit did not complete any of the app modules. Overall 
participants reported that the app was easy to use, useful and has the potential 
to improve their sexual health knowledge and behavior and awareness in risky 
contexts. Participants also highly rated the app, information and interface 
quality of the app.
DISCUSSION: Lessons learned from the pilot included the need for reminder 
systems and providing anticipatory guidance about Internet connectivity when 
using the app. These changes will be incorporated into study procedures for our 
multisite trial.
CONCLUSION: Overall, participants found the app to be highly usable and have the 
potential to positively improve their sexual risk behavior.

DOI: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz008
PMCID: PMC6603441
PMID: 31294422


37. EGEMS (Wash DC). 2015 Jun 29;3(2):1136. doi: 10.13063/2327-9214.1136. 
eCollection 2015.

Back to the Bedside: Developing a Bedside Aid for Concussion and Brain Injury 
Decisions in the Emergency Department.

Melnick ER(1), Lopez K(2), Hess EP(3), Abujarad F(1), Brandt CA(1), Shiffman 
RN(1), Post LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Yale School of Medicine.
(2)University of Connecticut.
(3)Mayo Clinic.

CONTEXT: Current information-rich electronic health record (EHR) interfaces 
require large, high-resolution screens running on desktop computers. This 
interface compromises the provider's already limited time at the bedside by 
physically separating the patient from the doctor. The case study presented here 
describes a patient-centered clinical decision support (CDS) design process that 
aims to bring the physician back to the bedside by integrating a patient 
decision aid with CDS for shared use by the patient and provider on a 
touchscreen tablet computer for deciding whether or not to obtain a CT scan for 
minor head injury in the emergency department, a clinical scenario that could 
benefit from CDS but has failed previous implementation attempts.
CASE DESCRIPTION: This case study follows the user-centered design (UCD) 
approach to build a bedside aid that is useful and usable, and that promotes 
shared decision-making between patients and their providers using a tablet 
computer at the bedside. The patient-centered decision support design process 
focuses on the prototype build using agile software development, but also 
describes the following: (1) the requirement gathering phase including 
triangulated qualitative research (focus groups and cognitive task analysis) to 
understand current challenges, (2) features for patient education, the 
physician, and shared decision-making, (3) system architecture and technical 
requirements, and (4) future plans for formative usability testing and field 
testing.
LESSONS LEARNED: We share specific lessons learned and general recommendations 
from critical insights gained in the patient-centered decision support design 
process about early stakeholder engagement, EHR integration, external expert 
feedback, challenges to two users on a single device, project management, and 
accessibility.
CONCLUSIONS: Successful implementation of this tool will require seamless 
integration into the provider's workflow. This protocol can create an effective 
interface for shared decision-making and safe resource reduction at the bedside 
in the austere and dynamic clinical environment of the ED and is generalizable 
for these purposes in other clinical environments as well.

DOI: 10.13063/2327-9214.1136
PMCID: PMC4537154
PMID: 26290885


38. JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol. 2019 Sep 6;6(2):e13511. doi: 10.2196/13511.

A Collaboration Between Game Developers and Rehabilitation Researchers to 
Develop a Web-Based App for Persons With Physical Disabilities: Case Study.

Terrill AL(1), MacKenzie JJ(2), Reblin M(3), Einerson J(1), Ferraro J(4), 
Altizer R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational & Recreational Therapies, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, UT, United States.
(2)Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, UT, United States.
(3)Department of Health Outcomes & Behavior, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, 
United States.
(4)Entertainment Arts and Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 
United States.

BACKGROUND: Individuals with a disability and their partners, who often provide 
care, are both at risk for depression and lower quality of life. Mobile health 
(mHealth) interventions are promising to address barriers to mental health care. 
Rehabilitation researchers and software development researchers must collaborate 
effectively with each other and with clinical and patient stakeholders to ensure 
successful mHealth development.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to aid researchers interested in mHealth software 
development by describing the collaborative process between a team of 
rehabilitation researchers, software development researchers, and stakeholders. 
Thus, we provide a framework (conceptual model) for other teams to replicate to 
build a Web-based mHealth app for individuals with physical disability.
METHODS: Rehabilitation researchers, software development researchers, and 
stakeholders (people with physical disabilities and clinicians) are involved in 
an iterative software development process. The overall process of developing an 
mHealth intervention includes initial development meetings and a co-design 
method called design box, in which the needs and key elements of the app are 
discussed. On the basis of the objectives outlined, a prototype is developed and 
goes through scoping iterations with feedback from stakeholders and end users. 
The prototype is then tested by users to identify technical errors and gather 
feedback on usability and accessibility.
RESULTS: Illustrating the overall development process, we present a case study 
based on our experience developing an app (SupportGroove) for couples coping 
with spinal cord injury. Examples of how we addressed specific challenges are 
also included. For example, feedback from stakeholders resulted in development 
of app features for individuals with limited functional ability. Initial designs 
lacked accessibility design principles made visible by end users. Solutions 
included large text, single click, and minimal scrolling to facilitate menu 
navigation for individuals using eye gaze technology. Prototype testing allowed 
further refinement and demonstrated high usability and engagement with 
activities in the app. Qualitative feedback indicated high levels of 
satisfaction, accessibility, and confidence in potential utility. We also 
present key lessons learned about working in a collaborative interdisciplinary 
team.
CONCLUSIONS: mHealth promises to help overcome barriers to mental health 
intervention access. However, the development of these interventions can be 
challenging because of the disparate and often siloed expertise required. By 
describing the mHealth software development process and illustrating it with a 
successful case study of rehabilitation researchers, software development 
researchers, and stakeholders collaborating effectively, our goal is to help 
other teams avoid challenges we faced and benefit from our lessons learned. 
Ultimately, good interdisciplinary collaboration will benefit individuals with 
disabilities and their families.

©Alexandra L Terrill, Justin J MacKenzie, Maija Reblin, Jackie Einerson, Jesse 
Ferraro, Roger Altizer. Originally published in JMIR Rehabilitation and 
Assistive Technology (http://rehab.jmir.org), 06.09.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/13511
PMCID: PMC6789424
PMID: 31573927

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


39. Telemed J E Health. 2006 Feb;12(1):24-34. doi: 10.1089/tmj.2006.12.24.

Applying heuristic evaluation to improve the usability of a telemedicine system.

Tang Z(1), Johnson TR, Tindall RD, Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)School of Health Information Sciences, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. Zhihua.Tang@uth.tmc.edu

The development of a telemedicine system should not only take advantage of 
technological advances but also pay close attention to users and the human 
issues involved. In this paper we examine the utility of heuristic evaluation in 
improving the usability of a digital emergency medical services (EMS) system 
equipped on an ambulance. The digital EMS system used advanced communication 
technologies to help remotely located trauma specialists gain access to patient 
data in real-time and direct life-saving measures in a timely fashion. To 
improve its usability, three experts inspected prototypes of the system 
according to 14 software usability heuristics. The analyses revealed information 
on the prevalence, severity, and nature of heuristic violations in the user 
interface design. The results were subsequently utilized to guide the iterative 
software design process. A comparison between two consecutive prototypes showed 
that the second design had only half as many usability violations as the first 
prototype and had considerable improvement in a number of usability heuristic 
categories. The validity of heuristic evaluation was examined in an ethnographic 
study of paramedics using a prototype of the system in their work environment. 
Users' task performances partially verified heuristic evaluation results. 
However, they also revealed problems that were not identified in heuristic 
evaluation but only became prominent during field observation. In conclusion, we 
argue that usability should be given high priority in the development of a 
telemedicine system, and that heuristic evaluation can be an effective and 
efficient way to identify usability problems in the early stage of software 
development.

DOI: 10.1089/tmj.2006.12.24
PMID: 16478410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Appl Clin Inform. 2016 Jan 13;7(1):22-32. doi: 10.4338/ACI-2015-07-CR-0091. 
eCollection 2016.

Software Prototyping: A Case Report of Refining User Requirements for a Health 
Information Exchange Dashboard.

Nelson SD(1), Del Fiol G(2), Hanseler H(2), Crouch BI(2), Cummins MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)University of Utah , Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

BACKGROUND: Health information exchange (HIE) between Poison Control Centers 
(PCCs) and Emergency Departments (EDs) could improve care of poisoned patients. 
However, PCC information systems are not designed to facilitate HIE with EDs; 
therefore, we are developing specialized software to support HIE within the 
normal workflow of the PCC using user-centered design and rapid prototyping.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the design of an HIE dashboard and the refinement of user 
requirements through rapid prototyping.
METHODS: Using previously elicited user requirements, we designed low-fidelity 
sketches of designs on paper with iterative refinement. Next, we designed an 
interactive high-fidelity prototype and conducted scenario-based usability tests 
with end users. Users were asked to think aloud while accomplishing tasks 
related to a case vignette. After testing, the users provided feedback and 
evaluated the prototype using the System Usability Scale (SUS).
RESULTS: Survey results from three users provided useful feedback that was then 
incorporated into the design. After achieving a stable design, we used the 
prototype itself as the specification for development of the actual software. 
Benefits of prototyping included having 1) subject-matter experts heavily 
involved with the design; 2) flexibility to make rapid changes, 3) the ability 
to minimize software development efforts early in the design stage; 4) rapid 
finalization of requirements; 5) early visualization of designs; 6) and a 
powerful vehicle for communication of the design to the programmers. Challenges 
included 1) time and effort to develop the prototypes and case scenarios; 2) no 
simulation of system performance; 3) not having all proposed functionality 
available in the final product; and 4) missing needed data elements in the PCC 
information system.

DOI: 10.4338/ACI-2015-07-CR-0091
PMCID: PMC4817332
PMID: 27081404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Med Internet Res. 2014 Jul 30;16(7):e181. doi: 10.2196/jmir.3376.

Purple: a modular system for developing and deploying behavioral intervention 
technologies.

Schueller SM(1), Begale M, Penedo FJ, Mohr DC.

Author information:
(1)Center for Behavioral Intervention Technologies, Department of Preventive 
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States.

The creation, deployment, and evaluation of Web-based and mobile-based 
applications for health, mental health, and wellness within research settings 
has tended to be siloed, with each research group developing their own systems 
and features. This has led to technological features and products that are not 
sharable across research teams, thereby limiting collaboration, reducing the 
speed of dissemination, and raising the bar for entry into this area of 
research. This paper provides an overview of Purple, an extensible, modular, and 
repurposable system created for the development of Web-based and mobile-based 
applications for health behavior change. Purple contains features required to 
construct applications and to manage and evaluate research trials using these 
applications. Core functionality of Purple includes elements that support user 
management, content authorship, content delivery, and data management. We 
discuss the history and development of the Purple system guided by the rationale 
of producing a system that allows greater collaboration and understanding across 
research teams interested in investigating similar questions and using similar 
methods. Purple provides a useful tool to meet the needs of stakeholders 
involved in the creation, provision, and usage of eHealth and mHealth 
applications. Housed in a non-profit, academic institution, Purple also offers 
the potential to facilitate the diffusion of knowledge across the research 
community and improve our capacity to deliver useful and usable applications 
that support the behavior change of end users.

DOI: 10.2196/jmir.3376
PMCID: PMC4129186
PMID: 25079298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


42. Qual Life Res. 2010 Jun;19(5):677-85. doi: 10.1007/s11136-010-9634-4. Epub 2010 
Mar 21.

The development of a clinical outcomes survey research application: Assessment 
Center.

Gershon R(1), Rothrock NE, Hanrahan RT, Jansky LJ, Harniss M, Riley W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern University, 625 North 
Michigan Avenue, Suite 2700, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. gershon@northwestern.edu

INTRODUCTION: The National Institutes of Health sponsored Patient-Reported 
Outcome Measurement Information System (PROMIS) aimed to create item banks and 
computerized adaptive tests (CATs) across multiple domains for individuals with 
a range of chronic diseases.
PURPOSE: Web-based software was created to enable a researcher to create 
study-specific Websites that could administer PROMIS CATs and other instruments 
to research participants or clinical samples. This paper outlines the process 
used to develop a user-friendly, free, Web-based resource (Assessment Center) 
for storage, retrieval, organization, sharing, and administration of 
patient-reported outcomes (PRO) instruments.
METHODS: Joint Application Design (JAD) sessions were conducted with 
representatives from numerous institutions in order to supply a general wish 
list of features. Use Cases were then written to ensure that end user 
expectations matched programmer specifications. Program development included 
daily programmer "scrum" sessions, weekly Usability Acceptability Testing (UAT) 
and continuous Quality Assurance (QA) activities pre- and post-release.
RESULTS: Assessment Center includes features that promote instrument development 
including item histories, data management, and storage of statistical analysis 
results.
CONCLUSIONS: This case study of software development highlights the collection 
and incorporation of user input throughout the development process. Potential 
future applications of Assessment Center in clinical research are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-010-9634-4
PMCID: PMC3686503
PMID: 20306332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2020 May 6;6(2):e19297. doi: 10.2196/19297.

Agile Requirements Engineering and Software Planning for a Digital Health 
Platform to Engage the Effects of Isolation Caused by Social Distancing: Case 
Study.

Meinert E(1)(2), Milne-Ives M(1), Surodina S(3), Lam C(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Digitally Enabled PrevenTative Health Research Group, Department of 
Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Primary Care and Public Health, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Skein Ltd, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Social distancing and shielding measures have been put in place to 
reduce social interaction and slow the transmission of the coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19). For older people, self-isolation presents particular challenges for 
mental health and social relationships. As time progresses, continued social 
distancing could have a compounding impact on these concerns.
OBJECTIVE: This project aims to provide a tool for older people and their 
families and peers to improve their well-being and health during and after 
regulated social distancing. First, we will evaluate the tool's feasibility, 
acceptability, and usability to encourage positive nutrition, enhance physical 
activity, and enable virtual interaction while social distancing. Second, we 
will be implementing the app to provide an online community to assist families 
and peer groups in maintaining contact with older people using goal setting. 
Anonymized data from the app will be aggregated with other real-world data 
sources to develop a machine learning algorithm to improve the identification of 
patients with COVID-19 and track for real time use by health systems.
METHODS: Development of this project is occurring at the time of publication, 
and therefore, a case study design was selected to provide a systematic means of 
capturing software engineering in progress. The app development framework for 
software design was based on agile methods. The evaluation of the app's 
feasibility, acceptability and usability shall be conducted using Public Health 
England's guidance on evaluating digital health products, Bandura's model of 
health promotion, the Reach Effectiveness Adoption Implementation Maintenance 
(RE-AIM) framework and the Nonadoption, Abandonment and Challenges to the 
Scale-up, Spread and Suitability (NASSS) framework.
RESULTS: Making use of a pre-existing software framework for health behavior 
change, a proof of concept was developed, and a multistage app development and 
deployment for the solution was created. Grant submissions to fund the project 
and study execution have been sought at the time of publication, and 
prediscovery iteration of the solution has begun. Ethical approval for a 
feasibility study design is being sought.
CONCLUSIONS: This case study lays the foundations for future app development to 
combat mental and societal issues arising from social distancing measures. The 
app will be tested and evaluated in future studies to allow continuous 
improvement of the app. This novel contribution will provide an evidence-based 
exemplar for future app development in the space of social isolation and 
loneliness.

©Edward Meinert, Madison Milne-Ives, Svitlana Surodina, Ching Lam. Originally 
published in JMIR Public Health and Surveillance (http://publichealth.jmir.org), 
06.05.2020.

DOI: 10.2196/19297
PMCID: PMC7205031
PMID: 32348293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


44. J Cogn Eng Decis Mak. 2016 Mar;10(1):74-90. doi: 10.1177/1555343416630875.

Designing Colorectal Cancer Screening Decision Support: A Cognitive Engineering 
Enterprise.

Militello LG(1), Saleem JJ(2), Borders MR(1), Sushereba CE(1), Haverkamp D(3), 
Wolf SP(4), Doebbeling BN(5).

Author information:
(1)Applied Decision Science, Dayton, Ohio.
(2)University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky.
(3)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
(4)Applied Decision Science, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(5)Arizona State University, Phoenix.

Adoption of clinical decision support has been limited. Important barriers 
include an emphasis on algorithmic approaches to decision support that do not 
align well with clinical work flow and human decision strategies, and the 
expense and challenge of developing, implementing, and refining decision support 
features in existing electronic health records (EHRs). We applied 
decision-centered design to create a modular software application to support 
physicians in managing and tracking colorectal cancer screening. Using 
decision-centered design facilitates a thorough understanding of cognitive 
support requirements from an end user perspective as a foundation for design. In 
this project, we used an iterative design process, including ethnographic 
observation and cognitive task analysis, to move from an initial design concept 
to a working modular software application called the Screening & Surveillance 
App. The beta version is tailored to work with the Veterans Health 
Administration's EHR Computerized Patient Record System (CPRS). Primary care 
providers using the beta version Screening & Surveillance App more accurately 
answered questions about patients and found relevant information more quickly 
compared to those using CPRS alone. Primary care providers also reported reduced 
mental effort and rated the Screening & Surveillance App positively for 
usability.

DOI: 10.1177/1555343416630875
PMCID: PMC4784691
PMID: 26973441


45. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2010 Nov 13;2010:702-6.

A Rapid Usability Evaluation (RUE) Method for Health Information Technology.

Russ AL(1), Baker DA, Fahner WJ, Milligan BS, Cox L, Hagg HK, Saleem JJ.

Author information:
(1)VA HSR&D Center on Implementing Evidence-Based Practice (CIEBP), Roudebush VA 
Medical Center (VAMC), Indianapolis, IN;

Usability testing can help generate design ideas to enhance the quality and 
safety of health information technology. Despite these potential benefits, few 
healthcare organizations conduct systematic usability testing prior to software 
implementation. We used a Rapid Usability Evaluation (RUE) method to apply 
usability testing to software development at a major VA Medical Center. We 
describe the development of the RUE method, provide two examples of how it was 
successfully applied, and discuss key insights gained from this work. Clinical 
informaticists with limited usability training were able to apply RUE to improve 
software evaluation and elected to continue to use this technique. RUE methods 
are relatively simple, do not require advanced training or usability software, 
and should be easy to adopt. Other healthcare organizations may be able to 
implement RUE to improve software effectiveness, efficiency, and safety.

PMCID: PMC3041446
PMID: 21347069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biomed Inform. 2017 Feb;66:204-213. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2017.01.009. Epub 2017 
Jan 17.

User-centered design improves the usability of drug-drug interaction alerts: 
Experimental comparison of interfaces.

Luna DR(1), Rizzato Lede DA(2), Otero CM(2), Risk MR(3), González Bernaldo de 
Quirós F(2).

Author information:
(1)Health Informatics Department, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Argentina; 
Instituto Tecnológico de Buenos Aires (ITBA), Argentina. Electronic address: 
daniel.luna@hospitalitaliano.org.ar.
(2)Health Informatics Department, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Instituto Tecnológico de Buenos Aires (ITBA), Argentina; Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina.

Clinical Decision Support Systems can alert health professionals about drug 
interactions when they prescribe medications. The Hospital Italiano de Buenos 
Aires in Argentina developed an electronic health record with drug-drug 
interaction alerts, using traditional software engineering techniques and 
requirements. Despite enhancing the drug-drug interaction knowledge database, 
the alert override rate of this system was very high. We redesigned the alert 
system using user-centered design (UCD) and participatory design techniques to 
enhance the drug-drug interaction alert interface. This paper describes the 
methodology of our UCD. We used crossover method with realistic, clinical 
vignettes to compare usability of the standard and new software versions in 
terms of efficiency, effectiveness, and user satisfaction. Our study showed 
that, compared to the traditional alert system, the UCD alert system was more 
efficient (alerts faster resolution), more effective (tasks completed with fewer 
errors), and more satisfying. These results indicate that UCD techniques that 
follow ISO 9241-210 can generate more usable alerts than traditional design.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2017.01.009
PMID: 28108211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2020 Feb 19:S0021-7557(19)30398-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.jped.2019.12.003. Online ahead of print.

Continuing education in the child health handbook: an educational software for 
primary care(1).

Barbosa CP(1), Belian RB(2), de Araújo CMT(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal de Pernambuco (UFPE), Programa de Pós-Graduação em Saúde 
da Criança e do Adolescente, Recife, PE, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal de Pernambuco (UFPE), Programa de Pós-Graduação em Saúde 
da Criança e do Adolescente, Recife, PE, Brazil. Electronic address: 
rosalie.belian@ufpe.br.

OBJECTIVE: To present, the process of development and evaluation of an 
educational software on the Child Health Handbook proposed for the continuing 
education of primary care nurses and physicians.
METHODS: Quantitative study of methodological development. For software 
development, the following steps were followed: definition of objectives; 
determination of the target audience; choice of pedagogical and theoretical 
reference for content; content selection and structuring; software development 
and evaluation by experts (five nurses and four physicians). All responded to an 
instrument that included four domains: pedagogical; content; functionality; 
system presentation and usability. The evaluation criteria were arranged on a 
Likert-type scale. The percentage of agreement and Content Validity Index were 
used for the quantitative analysis of the degree of agreement, considering a 
Content Validity Index cutoff point equal to 0.80.
RESULTS: The overall agreement index, calculated by the arithmetic mean of the 
Contents Validity Index of the evaluated domains, was 0.96, with scores ranging 
from 0.90 to 1.00. The average percentage of agreement of the experts per domain 
was 92.86%, with lower agreement in the content (80.95%), presentation, and 
usability (90.48%) domains. 100% of percentage of agreement was observed in the 
pedagogical and functionality domains among the evaluated specialists.
CONCLUSION: The percentage of agreement, Content Validity Index and overall 
agreement index of the Child Health Handbook educational software in the context 
of primary care disclosed the software adequacy as an educational resource for 
continuing education of primary care nurses and physicians. Considering the 
assessed dimensions, it can also be used by other health professionals and 
undergraduate students.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Editora Ltda.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jped.2019.12.003
PMID: 32084441


48. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2013 Mar;39(3):129-35. doi: 
10.1016/s1553-7250(13)39019-9.

Enhancing electronic health record usability in pediatric patient care: a 
scenario-based approach.

Patterson ES(1), Zhang J, Abbott P, Gibbons MC, Lowry SZ, Quinn MT, Ramaiah M, 
Brick D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Health Information Management and Systems, School of Health and 
Rehabilitation Sciences, College of Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, 
USA. Emily.Patterson2@osumc.edu

BACKGROUND: Usability of electronic health records (EHRs) is an important factor 
affecting patient safety and the EHR adoption rate for both adult and pediatric 
care providers. A panel of interdisciplinary experts (the authors) was convened 
by the National Institute of Standards and Technology to generate consensus 
recommendations to improve EHR usefulness, usability, and patient safety when 
supporting pediatric care, with a focus on critical user interactions.
METHODS: The panel members represented expertise in the disciplines of human 
factors engineering (HFE), usability, informatics, and pediatrics in ambulatory 
care and pediatric intensive care. An iterative, scenario-based approach was 
used to identify unique considerations in pediatric care and relevant human 
factors concepts. A draft of the recommendations were reviewed by invited 
experts in pediatric informatics, emergency medicine, neonatology, pediatrics, 
HFE, nursing, usability engineering, and software development and 
implementation.
RECOMMENDATIONS: Recommendations for EHR developers, small-group pediatric 
medical practices, and children's hospitals were identified out of the original 
54 recommendations, in terms of nine critical user interaction categories: 
patient identification, medications, alerts, growth chart, vaccinations, labs, 
newborn care, privacy, and radiology.
CONCLUSION: Pediatric patient care has unique dimensions, with great complexity 
and high stakes for adverse events. The recommendations are anticipated to 
increase the rate of EHR adoption by pediatric care providers and improve 
patient safety for pediatric patients. The described methodology might be useful 
for accelerating adoption and increasing safety in a variety of clinical areas 
where the adoption of EHRs is lagging or usability issues are believed to reduce 
potential patient safety, efficiency, and quality benefits.

DOI: 10.1016/s1553-7250(13)39019-9
PMID: 23516763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Health Informatics J. 2017 Sep;23(3):234-245. doi: 10.1177/1460458216642504. 
Epub 2016 Jun 7.

Usability evaluation of the digital anger thermometer app.

Mattson DC(1).

Author information:
(1)The Creative Counseling Group, USA.

The digital anger thermometer is a prototype for a mobile application (app) for 
use with adults in anger management treatment. The digital anger thermometer 
incorporates standards of software development in addition to anger management 
resources from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 
The digital anger thermometer underwent a usability study conducted by five 
expert reviewers. The results indicate that it is easy to learn, efficient, and 
ergonomically sound. However, it does not offer support features or user-error 
tolerance. The digital anger thermometer prototype requires additional usability 
studies and comparative research in order for it to become an actual mental 
health app.

DOI: 10.1177/1460458216642504
PMID: 27271113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Med Internet Res. 2011 Oct 18;13(4):e87. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1721.

Development of an interactive, Web-delivered system to increase provider-patient 
engagement in smoking cessation.

Sadasivam RS(1), Delaughter K, Crenshaw K, Sobko HJ, Williams JH, Coley HL, Ray 
MN, Ford DE, Allison JJ, Houston TK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Health Informatics and Implementation Science, Quantitative 
Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 
01545, USA. rajani.sadasivam@umassmed.edu

BACKGROUND: Patient self-management interventions for smoking cessation are 
effective but underused. Health care providers do not routinely refer smokers to 
these interventions.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of our study was to uncover barriers and facilitators 
to the use of an e-referral system that will be evaluated in a community-based 
randomized trial. The e-referral system will allow providers to refer smokers to 
an online smoking intervention during routine clinical care.
METHODS: We devised a four-step development and pilot testing process: (1) 
system conceptualization using Delphi to identify key functionalities that would 
overcome barriers in provider referrals for smoking cessation, (2) Web system 
programming using agile software development and best programming practices with 
usability refinement using think-aloud testing, (3) implementation planning 
using the nominal group technique for the effective integration of the system 
into the workflow of practices, and (4) pilot testing to identify practice 
recruitment and system-use barriers in real-world settings.
RESULTS: Our Delphi process (step 1) conceptualized three key e-referral 
functions: (1) Refer Your Smokers, allowing providers to e-refer patients at the 
point of care by entering their emails directly into the system, (2) practice 
reports, providing feedback regarding referrals and impact of smoking-cessation 
counseling, and (3) secure messaging, facilitating provider-patient 
communication. Usability testing (step 2) suggested the system was easy to use, 
but implementation planning (step 3) suggested several important approaches to 
encourage use (eg, proactive email cues to encourage practices to participate). 
Pilot testing (step 4) in 5 practices had limited success, with only 2 patients 
referred; we uncovered important recruitment and system-use barriers (eg, lack 
of study champion, training, and motivation, registration difficulties, and 
forgetting to refer).
CONCLUSIONS: Implementing a system to be used in a clinical setting is complex, 
as several issues can affect system use. In our ongoing large randomized trial, 
preliminary analysis with the first 50 practices using the system for 3 months 
demonstrated that our rigorous preimplementation evaluation helped us 
successfully identify and overcome these barriers before the main trial.
TRIAL: Clinicaltrials.gov NCT00797628; 
http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00797628 (Archived by WebCite at 
http://www.webcitation.org/61feCfjCy).

DOI: 10.2196/jmir.1721
PMCID: PMC3222193
PMID: 22011394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared


51. J Med Syst. 2012 Apr;36(2):437-50. doi: 10.1007/s10916-010-9488-x. Epub 2010 Apr 
23.

A user-centered, object-oriented methodology for developing Health Information 
Systems: a Clinical Information System (CIS) example.

Konstantinidis G(1), Anastassopoulos GC, Karakos AS, Anagnostou E, Danielides V.

Author information:
(1)ENT Department, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece. 
georgios.konstantinidis@gmail.com

The aim of this study is to present our perspectives on healthcare analysis and 
design and the lessons learned from our experience with the development of a 
distributed, object-oriented Clinical Information System (CIS). In order to 
overcome known issues regarding development, implementation and finally 
acceptance of a CIS by the physicians we decided to develop a novel 
object-oriented methodology by integrating usability principles and techniques 
in a simplified version of a well established software engineering process 
(SEP), the Unified Process (UP). A multilayer architecture has been defined and 
implemented with the use of a vendor application framework. Our first 
experiences from a pilot implementation of our CIS are positive. This approach 
allowed us to gain a socio-technical understanding of the domain and enabled us 
to identify all the important factors that define both the structure and the 
behavior of a Health Information System.

DOI: 10.1007/s10916-010-9488-x
PMID: 20703707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 2016 Jan;20(1):189-200. doi: 
10.1109/JBHI.2014.2378814.

Design, Implementation, and Wide Pilot Deployment of FitForAll: An Easy to use 
Exergaming Platform Improving Physical Fitness and Life Quality of Senior 
Citizens.

Konstantinidis EI, Billis AS, Mouzakidis CA, Zilidou VI, Antoniou PE, Bamidis 
PD.

Many platforms have emerged as response to the call for technology supporting 
active and healthy aging. Key requirements for any such e-health systems and any 
subsequent business exploitation are tailor-made design and proper evaluation. 
This paper presents the design, implementation, wide deployment, and evaluation 
of the low cost, physical exercise, and gaming (exergaming) FitForAll (FFA) 
platform system usability, user adherence to exercise, and efficacy are 
explored. The design of FFA is tailored to elderly populations, distilling 
literature guidelines and recommendations. The FFA architecture introduces 
standard physical exercise protocols in exergaming software engineering, as well 
as, standard physical assessment tests for augmented adaptability through 
adjustable exercise intensity. This opens up the way to next generation 
exergaming software, which may be more automatically/smartly adaptive. 116 
elderly users piloted FFA five times/week, during an eight-week controlled 
intervention. Usability evaluation was formally conducted (SUS, SUMI 
questionnaires). Control group consisted of a size-matched elderly group 
following cognitive training. Efficacy was assessed objectively through the 
senior fitness (Fullerton) test, and subjectively, through WHOQoL-BREF 
comparisons of pre-postintervention between groups. Adherence to schedule was 
measured by attendance logs. The global SUMI score was 68.33±5.85%, while SUS 
was 77.7. Good usability perception is reflected in relatively high adherence of 
82% for a daily two months pilot schedule. Compared to control group, elderly 
using FFA improved significantly strength, flexibility, endurance, and balance 
while presenting a significant trend in quality of life improvements. This is 
the first elderly focused exergaming platform intensively evaluated with more 
than 100 participants. The use of formal tools makes the findings comparable to 
other studies and forms an elderly exergaming corpus.

DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2378814
PMID: 26731797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2012;2012:799-808. Epub 2012 Nov 3.

OPIC: Ontology-driven Patient Information Capturing system for epilepsy.

Sahoo SS(1), Zhao M, Luo L, Bozorgi A, Gupta D, Lhatoo SD, Zhang GQ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Informatics, CaseWestern Reserve University, Cleveland, 
OH, USA.

The widespread use of paper or document-based forms for capturing patient 
information in various clinical settings, for example in epilepsy centers, is a 
critical barrier for large-scale, multi-center research studies that require 
interoperable, consistent, and error-free data collection. This challenge can be 
addressed by a web-accessible and flexible patient data capture system that is 
supported by a common terminological system to facilitate data re-usability, 
sharing, and integration. We present OPIC, an Ontology-driven Patient 
Information Capture (OPIC) system that uses a domain-specific epilepsy and 
seizure ontology (EpSO) to (1) support structured entry of multi-modal epilepsy 
data, (2) proactively ensure quality of data through use of ontology terms in 
drop-down menus, and (3) identify and index clinically relevant ontology terms 
in free-text fields to improve accuracy of subsequent analytical queries (e.g. 
cohort identification). EpSO, modeled using the Web Ontology Language (OWL), 
conforms to the recommendations of the International League Against Epilepsy 
(ILAE) classification and terminological commission. OPIC has been developed 
using agile software engineering methodology for rapid development cycles in 
close collaboration with domain expert and end users. We report the result from 
the initial deployment of OPIC at the University Hospitals Case Medical Center 
(UH CMC) epilepsy monitoring unit (EMU) as part of the NIH-funded project on 
Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy (SUDEP). Preliminary user evaluation shows 
that OPIC has achieved its design objectives to be an intuitive patient 
information capturing system that also reduces the potential for data entry 
errors and variability in use of epilepsy terms.

PMCID: PMC3540561
PMID: 23304354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Med Internet Res. 2012 May 16;14(3):e74. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1943.

Using Internet search engines to obtain medical information: a comparative 
study.

Wang L(1), Wang J, Wang M, Li Y, Liang Y, Xu D.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Symbol Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of 
Education, College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.

BACKGROUND: The Internet has become one of the most important means to obtain 
health and medical information. It is often the first step in checking for basic 
information about a disease and its treatment. The search results are often 
useful to general users. Various search engines such as Google, Yahoo!, Bing, 
and Ask.com can play an important role in obtaining medical information for both 
medical professionals and lay people. However, the usability and effectiveness 
of various search engines for medical information have not been comprehensively 
compared and evaluated.
OBJECTIVE: To compare major Internet search engines in their usability of 
obtaining medical and health information.
METHODS: We applied usability testing as a software engineering technique and a 
standard industry practice to compare the four major search engines (Google, 
Yahoo!, Bing, and Ask.com) in obtaining health and medical information. For this 
purpose, we searched the keyword breast cancer in Google, Yahoo!, Bing, and 
Ask.com and saved the results of the top 200 links from each search engine. We 
combined nonredundant links from the four search engines and gave them to 
volunteer users in an alphabetical order. The volunteer users evaluated the 
websites and scored each website from 0 to 10 (lowest to highest) based on the 
usefulness of the content relevant to breast cancer. A medical expert identified 
six well-known websites related to breast cancer in advance as standards. We 
also used five keywords associated with breast cancer defined in the latest 
release of Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine-Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) and 
analyzed their occurrence in the websites.
RESULTS: Each search engine provided rich information related to breast cancer 
in the search results. All six standard websites were among the top 30 in search 
results of all four search engines. Google had the best search validity (in 
terms of whether a website could be opened), followed by Bing, Ask.com, and 
Yahoo!. The search results highly overlapped between the search engines, and the 
overlap between any two search engines was about half or more. On the other 
hand, each search engine emphasized various types of content differently. In 
terms of user satisfaction analysis, volunteer users scored Bing the highest for 
its usefulness, followed by Yahoo!, Google, and Ask.com.
CONCLUSIONS: Google, Yahoo!, Bing, and Ask.com are by and large effective search 
engines for helping lay users get health and medical information. Nevertheless, 
the current ranking methods have some pitfalls and there is room for improvement 
to help users get more accurate and useful information. We suggest that search 
engine users explore multiple search engines to search different types of health 
information and medical knowledge for their own needs and get a professional 
consultation if necessary.

DOI: 10.2196/jmir.1943
PMCID: PMC3799567
PMID: 22672889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


55. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 1994 Dec;45 Suppl:S1-11.

The component-based architecture of the HELIOS medical software engineering 
environment.

Degoulet P(1), Jean FC, Engelmann U, Meinzer HP, Baud R, Sandblad B, Wigertz O, 
Le Meur R, Jagermann C.

Author information:
(1)Medical Informatics Department, Broussais University Hospital, Paris, France.

The constitution of highly integrated health information networks and the growth 
of multimedia technologies raise new challenges for the development of medical 
applications. We describe in this paper the general architecture of the HELIOS 
medical software engineering environment devoted to the development and 
maintenance of multimedia distributed medical applications. HELIOS is made of a 
set of software components, federated by a communication channel called the 
HELIOS Unification Bus. The HELIOS kernel includes three main components, the 
Analysis-Design and Environment, the Object Information System and the Interface 
Manager. HELIOS services consist in a collection of toolkits providing the 
necessary facilities to medical application developers. They include Image 
Related services, a Natural Language Processor, a Decision Support System and 
Connection services. The project gives special attention to both object-oriented 
approaches and software re-usability that are considered crucial steps towards 
the development of more reliable, coherent and integrated applications.

PMID: 7882667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2012;178:124-9.

Evaluation of bluetooth low power for physiological monitoring in a home based 
cardiac rehabilitation program.

Martin T(1), Ding H, D'Souza M, Karunanithi M.

Author information:
(1)University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of mortality in Australia, and 
places large burdens on the healthcare system. To assist patients with CVDs in 
recovering from cardiac events and mediating cardiac risk factors, a home based 
cardiac rehabilitation program, known as the Care Assessment Platform (CAP), was 
developed. In the CAP program, patients are required to manually enter health 
information into their mobile phones on a daily basis. The manual operation is 
often subject to human errors and is inconvenient for some elderly patients. To 
improve this, an automated wireless solution has been desired. The objectives of 
this paper are to investigate the feasibility of implementing the newly released 
Bluetooth 4.0 (BT4.0) for the CAP program, and practically evaluate BT4.0 
communications between a developed mobile application and some emulated 
healthcare devices. The study demonstrated that BT4.0 addresses usability, 
interoperability and security for healthcare applications, reduces the power 
consumption in wireless communication, and improves the flexibility of interface 
for software development. This evaluation study provides an essential mobile 
BT4.0 framework to incorporate a large range of healthcare devices for clinical 
assessment and intervention in the CAP program, and hence it is useful for 
similar development and research work of other mobile healthcare solutions.

PMID: 22797030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]